People's democracy is an umbrella term in Marxist–Leninist theory that encompasses two processes. The first process focuses on the establishment of a communist state formation known as the people's democratic state through a people's democratic revolution. The second process deals with how the people's democratic state transitions the society it controls from the capitalist mode of production to the socialist mode of production, transforming the state into a socialist state in the process. The people's democratic state is a product of specific base and superstructural relation that change over time. For example, it was believed that the people's democratic state had two superstructural class forms: it was established as a revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry and later transformed into a dictatorship of the proletariat.
The people's democratic state is considered to be a state of the socialist type, but not a socialist state. The unified state power of the supreme state organ of power under the leadership of the ruling communist party is the organisational form of state power, that is, the form of government of these states. Despite this, there were some slight institutional differences between these states.
Laos is the only existing communist state that currently self-designates as a people's democratic state.


== Theoretical origins ==
The theory of people's democracy was conceived largely by Soviet theorists with small, but insignificant contributions from other communist states. It was conceived to explain the emergence and development of the new communist states established after World War II. In this regard, it shares similarities with another term, people's republic, which was used to designate states in Asia, such as the Bukharan People's Soviet Republic, Khorezm People's Soviet Republic (KPSR), Mongolian People's Republic and the Tuvan People's Republic. These states received this designation since they were considered far too underdeveloped to initiate the construction of socialism. Pravda, the official newspaper of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, referred to Mongolia upon its establishment as a "bourgeois-democratic system of a new type." Neither Bukhara nor Khorezm claimed to have reached socialism, with the KPSR constitution explicitly stating that the state had not reached socialism. The Far Eastern Republic, while not using the title of people's republic in its name, was recognised by the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic as a "separate, independent, democratic republic".
Despite the widespread use of the term people's republic, no theoretical system was created to explain its usage. Considering that all these republics, except Mongolia, joined the Soviet Union, the term itself disappeared somewhat from Soviet usage. With the end of World War II and the emergence of European communist states, the term people's republic experienced a comeback of sorts, as part of the theoretical system of people's democracy (and new democracy). However, despite its widespread use in the communist world after World War II, Western commentators and non-communists have rarely acknowledged the term. The people's democracy and people's democratic state replaced previous terminology. For example, in 1934, the Communist Party of India called for establishing a soviet republic, but in 1948 it declared its commitment to establishing a people's democratic state. The same could be witnessed in Europe where, for example, the French Communist Party called for the establishment of a soviet republic in France in 1940, but began already in 1941 to call for the establishment of a "people's regime", a theoretical precursor to the people's democratic state.
Due to this theory's unclear origin, Marxist−Leninist theorists did not agree among themselves which country had established the world's first people's democratic state. For example, orientalist Ilya Zlatkin claimed in 1951 at a conference on people's democracy hosted by the Oriental Institute of the USSR Academy of Sciences, that Bukhara was the first people's democratic state. However, the official position of the Mongolian People's Republic was that it was the first. Aleksey Martinov and Pyotr Zayonchkovsky disagreed with this claim, arguing that the first people's democracies were established after World War II. Historian Georgy Ehrenburg disagreed with all of them, arguing that people's democracy had first come into being in China during the Chinese Civil War. Some pointed to Mao Zedong's 1940 pamphlet, On New Democracy, as the origins story of people's democracy while others pointed to Yugoslav leader Josip Broz Tito's speech to the 3rd Session of the Anti-Fascist Council for the National Liberation of Yugoslavia in 1945 in which he called for a "new type of democracy based upon the social equality of the masses."


=== From vagueness to unique national paths to socialism ===
In the first postwar years, Soviet leaders did not try to explain the meaning of the term people's democracy. Its vagueness was its strength, and in postwar Czechoslovakia, for example, it was used by non-communists, such as Edvard Beneš, and communists alike, such as Klement Gottwald. Beneš even affirmed that Czechoslovakia was a people's democratic state. At that point in time, neither Joseph Stalin, the Soviet leader, nor any other high-ranking Soviet official tried to give the term any coherent meaning. Scholar Francis J. Kase reasons that many in postwar Eastern Europe believed the term to mean a hybrid of the Soviet and liberal democratic form of state.
The first attempts at creating a theoretical system began in 1947. The main characteristic was that the people's democratic states followed a different path to socialism than the Soviet Union. Another important feature was that the people's democratic state was deemed a transitory state between the capitalist mode of production and the socialist mode of production. In March 1947, Eugen Varga, in his article "Democracy of a New Type", argued that the new democracies of Eastern Europe represented a new order. The feudal mode of production had been abolished while industry and banking had come under state ownership, but private ownership in other sectors had yet to be abolished. The class character of the state was proletarian since the proletariat acted as a ruling class in an alliance with other progressive classes.
Varga noted it would be wrong to categorise the class character of these states as the dictatorship of the proletariat since the states in question not only allowed other classes to operate their own parties, but these parties were allowed to participate in state affairs. He viewed the people's democratic states as a "third type of state" that was neither the dictatorship of the proletariat nor the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, implying that the state was neither socialist nor capitalist as well. Seeing that it was a transitory state formation, its main aim was to transition the state and society from capitalism to socialism by nationalising and developing the economy. He thus argued that the people's democratic states represented "something entirely new in the history of mankind." However, despite this label, Varga was open to the possibility of the Eastern European states not instituting a carbon copy of the communist form of government, arguing that a parliamentary democracy under the communist party's leadership was also a viable system.
Unlike Varga, Soviet theorist Ilya Trainin was more careful. Like Varga, he acknowledged that the people's democratic states represented a new type of state that he called "democracies of special type". Trainin was more careful regarding the class character of the state, arguing that the working class should rule in an alliance with other forces by forming a broad coalition based on national and democratic programmes rather than on socialism. In this broad coalition, Trainin envisioned the communist party to have a hegemonic role, which was a prerequisite if socialism was to be constructed in this coalition. This was necessary to ensure the communist party enjoyed support amongst the broad masses.
Due to the vagueness of the people's democratic discourse, the newly installed communist state leaders used the term to denote a national path to socialism different from that traversed by the Soviet Union. Georgy Dimitrov, the first leader of communist Bulgaria, began speaking of a "Bulgarian course toward socialism" and of a "realistic and painless road to socialism" in 1946, which all implied a less violent transition than what the Soviet Union experienced. Władysław Gomułka, the first secretary of the Central Committee of the Polish Workers' Party, argued in 1948 that Poland needed to implement its own unique policy of a Polish path to socialism. Gomułka believed that Poland had selected a distinctive Polish route for its development, which he called the path of people's democracy. Given the current circumstances, neither a dictatorship of the working class nor a one-party dictatorship is required or desired, Gomułka argued. He thought that the governance of Poland could be achieved through collaboration among all democratic parties. This viewpoint emerged from Poland's socio-political context, as he contended that the democracy the communists were establishing was unparalleled in history. Additionally, unlike the Soviet Union, Poland did not adopt the socialist mode of production or establish a socialist state since non-state forms of property continued to play a significant role in the economy.  Gomułka believed that the Polish democracy the communists were creating was distinct from traditional democracies in other nations, except for those governed by a parliament with a socialist majority.
Klement Gottwald, the chairman of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia, seemed to share Dimitrov and Gomułka's sentiment. Gottwald felt that the Czechoslovak people were experiencing a unique transformation that didn't align with any previous experience. During this period, it was essential for the Czechoslovak communists to discover a unique national path, tactics, and distinct methods to construct socialism. Consequently, he believed Czechoslovakia was undergoing a national and democratic revolution that was establishing a unique Czechoslovak state type. Gottwald reasoned that this new state type, peculiar to Czechoslovakia, was a people's democratic republic. It was based on an alliance of people from rural and urban areas in the National Front that had successfully removed the former capitalist ruling class from power.
There was not one road to socialism, but many, reasoned Gottwald. This, he argued, was made clear in the classical Marxist–Leninist works. That meant, he reasoned, that Czechoslovakia did not need to introduce the dictatorship of the proletariat and the system of soviets. Since the material forces in Czechoslovakia differed from those in the Soviet Union when it transitioned to the socialist mode of production, another path was possible. This meant, he reasoned, that Czechoslovakia was creating its own unique “new type of democracy” that he labelled people's democracy. However, this was not unique to Czechoslovakia, and the countries of Bulgaria, Poland, and Yugoslavia were also traversing their own unique road to socialism. By 1948, this line was changed, and the orthodox Soviet position on people's democracy was formulated and broadly accepted by the communist world.


== People's democratic revolution ==
Aleksander Sobolev formulated the first coherent theoretical framework on the people's democratic revolution in 1951. His 1951 article, "People's Democracy as a Form of Political Organisation of Society", was published in the CPSU Central Committee's theoretical journal Bolshevik. Upon being published, it was immediately translated into the foreign languages of the communist parties of the people's democratic states, and published in their respective theoretical journals. Sobolev was, at this point, not a party cadre or a party ideologue, but instead an academic at the USSR Academy of Sciences, the highest state research institution. Despite his minimal presence in the party, the CPSU Central Committee supported his position. On 19 April 1952, in an article in Pravda, the newspaper of the CPSU Central Committee, it listed significant errors in the works of ideologues, theorists, and scholars on the subject of people's democracy.
Sobolev's framework was constructed on the already accepted Marxist–Leninist conception of a two-stage theory, that is, the people's democratic revolution had to undergo two phases: first, the bourgeois-democratic revolution and, second, the socialist revolution. The theory of the two-stage revolution was taken from The Communist Manifesto, written by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels. In it, they posit that a bourgeois revolution has to take place first to abolish the feudal mode of production and superstructure, and introduce the capitalist mode of production and the dictatorship of the bourgeois. To reach communism, a proletarian revolution was needed to abolish capitalism and establish the dictatorship of the proletariat.
Marx's and Engels' conception of a two-stage revolution was later expounded on by Vladimir Lenin, the leader of what became known as the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. In his, The Tasks of the Russian Social-Democrats (1898) and Two Tactics of Social Democracy in the Democratic Revolution (1905), Lenin directly borrowed this framework and tried to make it relevant to the conditions in the Russian Empire. According to Lenin's perspective, the party was for guiding the proletariat's class struggle and coordinating it in two key forms: the democratic struggle and the socialist struggle. The democratic struggle focused on opposing absolutism to achieve political freedom in Russia and to promote the democratisation of the state system, while the socialist struggle aimed to dismantle capitalism to establish socialism.
Although Lenin emphasized that the two revolutions were separate, he also thought they were inextricably connected. The proletariat was alone in its fight for socialism but had many potential allies in its struggle against tsarist absolutism and oppression. In the fight against tsarism, the proletariat would, he believed, naturally find an ally in the bourgeoisie and other social forces that opposed absolutism. He advised that the party align with all progressive forces and set socialism aside until it became relevant. Unlike Marx and Engels, he believed that it would be better for the proletariat to lead the bourgeois-democratic revolution. Lenin argued that the bourgeoisie was not capable of consistently upholding democratic principles and would ultimately betray the quest for liberty.
Lenin recognised that, from a Marxist perspective, the material conditions of the Russian Empire were insufficient to establish a dictatorship of the proletariat following a bourgeois democratic revolution. His solution was to form a class alliance led by the proletariat, which he termed the revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry in the immediate aftermath of the bourgeois democratic revolution. This revolutionary-democratic dictatorship would be distinctly Jacobin in nature, focusing on eliminating enemies of freedom, suppressing any resistance through force, and making no compromises with the despised legacy of serfdom, Asiatic oppression, and human degradation. Lenin emphasised that this revolutionary-democratic dictatorship would not liquidate capitalism but would strengthen it within the context of the bourgeois democratic revolution. He predicted that as soon as the bourgeois democratic revolution was completed, a proletarian socialist revolution would immediately follow. In this second revolutionary stage, the proletariat would join forces with semi-proletarians to abolish capitalism and establish socialism.


=== Bourgeois democratic revolution ===
Marxist–Leninists distinguished between a bourgeois revolution and a bourgeois democratic revolution. While both revolutions were perceived as bringing the bourgeoisie to power by abolishing the feudal mode of production and the monarchic absolutism, the two revolutions had different class traits. That means, at first glance, that these revolutions appear identical. For example, Czechoslovak theorists Jiří Houška and Karel Kára, defined the bourgeois democratic revolution as a "social revolution whose historical task is to renew the harmony between the relations of production and the forces of production on the basis of capitalism." However, what distinguishes it from the bourgeois revolution is that the bourgeois democratic revolution purportedly benefits the broad masses of people.
While the broad masses of the people have always participated in bourgeois revolutions, from a historical perspective, they are always, according to Houška and Kára, betrayed by the bourgeoisie. Marxist–Leninist teaching usually turns to the French Revolution of 1789 as a good example. While the revolution called for abolishing privileges and the institution of real equality, it ended up instituting capitalism while the broad masses were purportedly deprived of all political and social rights. The American revolution was treated similarly. It was interpreted as a revolution that became a reality due to the broad coalition of small farmers and workers who supported it. Still, upon the revolution's completion, it laid the basis for the growth of capitalism instead of representing the broad masses.
Unlike these revolutions, the bourgeois democratic revolution of the people's democratic revolution was not to be led by the bourgeoisie themselves. In his, Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism, Lenin had argued that capitalism had become an international system of exploitation. In this stage, capitalist-imperialists defended feudalism in backward parts of the world to protect their own interests. From then on, Marxist–Leninists believed that the Western capitalist bourgeois stopped playing a progressive role in abolishing feudalism. To ensure that feudalism and the remnants of feudalism were abolished, the proletariat needed to take over the leadership of the bourgeois democratic revolution. According to this thinking, the proletarian socialist revolution commences immediately after the completion of the bourgeois democratic revolution, meaning that the bourgeois never takes control of the state.
According to Sobolev, the first stage of the people's democratic revolution, that is, the bourgeouis democratic revolution, was an anti-imperialist and anti-fascist revolution directed against German Nazism and the oppression of the people it had overseen. Like a traditional bourgeois democratic revolution, the people's democratic revolution was an anti-feudal revolution directed at the remaining feudal elements in Eastern European society. In its first phase, the bourgeois democratic revolutionary stage, the people's democratic revolution was expected to focus on abolishing feudalism rather than constructing socialism. Its anti-fascist characteristics were also perceived as being mostly anti-feudal, since fascism represented the most reactionary form of capitalism in the age of imperialism. That is, it had sought to defend basic feudal elements in the economy instead of liquidating them.
According to Marxist–Leninist doctrine, the people's democratic revolution has six distinctive characteristics during its bourgeois-democratic phase. The initial two characteristics focus on the class character of the revolution. To start, the revolution is under the leadership of the proletariat, which supplies its own methods of revolutionary action and imparts a unique character to the revolution. Secondly, the peasantry, instead of supporting the bourgeoisie during the revolution, chooses to join forces with the proletariat.
The third, fourth, and fifth characteristics deal with the nature of the bourgeois revolution led by the proletariat. The third characteristic views the bourgeois revolution as an integral element of the world revolution. This facet connected two phenomena traditional Marxism originally viewed as incompatible: nationalism and socialist internationalism. Fourthly, the bourgeois-democratic revolutions led by the proletariat are supported by the Soviet Union, increasing their chances of success.
The fifth characteristic states that, at this point, the bourgeoisie cannot initiate any democratic revolution. It is thus the proletariat's responsibility to decide who controls the state and directs the revolution. Nonetheless, the proletarian leadership in the bourgeois-democratic revolution did not imply that the proletariat monopolised state power alone. The proletariat's primary responsibility at this point is to liberate the peasantry from the sway of the bourgeois. With this foundation, the proletariat can overthrow the existing ruling class system and establish a state based on the dictatorship of the proletariat, creating a superstructural relation conducive to socialism.
The final characteristic pertains to the material base. Since capitalism is in crisis, the material base of the bourgeois-democratic revolution is the agrarian revolution. This revolution aims to redistribute land based on the idea that land should go to the people who cultivate it. The foundations of socialism have been established through the state nationalising the commanding heights of the industry and banking sectors. Still, capitalism remains society's dominant mode of production at this point. According to Mao Zedong, the bourgeois democratic revolution paves the way for capitalism by establishing the material base for socialism.


=== Transitioning into the proletarian socialist revolution ===
The bourgeois democratic revolution does not end, but grows into its proletarian socialist revolution, its second and final stage. This theory, while formulated by Lenin, had many similarities with Leon Trotsky's permanent revolution and Mao Zedong's later call for uninterrupted revolution. This theory of an uninterrupted revolution that grows into a higher revolutionary process has certain preconditions, Soviet theorists believed, to be successful. For example, the Mongolian revolution of 1921 could transition into a socialist revolution thanks to the existence and help offered by the Soviet Union, which assisted Mongolia in establishing a modern material base as well as the superstructural forces that were struggling for socialism.
Dmitry Chesnokov, a philosopher who later became a member of the Presidium of the CPSU Central Committee,  believed that a bourgeois democratic revolution could only transition into a socialist one if the following preconditions were met: firstly, that the revolution was ledf by the proletariat and secondly, constellation of forces in society were conducive to estalibh proletarian rule.
The proletariat, in the class coalition phase of the bourgeois democratic revolution, had to, according to Soviet theorists, use its control of the state machinery to garner support for its cause and pressure competing classes actively out of state positions. Soviet ideologues referred to this as "revolution from above". Nikolai Tropkin, a Soviet theorist, asserted that the primary means of moving from a bourgeois revolution to a proletarian socialist revolution in Eastern Europe was not accomplished by violently overthrowing the state. Instead, revolutionary change was instigated by a peaceful revolution initiated from above, led by state organs under proletarian control with the backing of the popular masses from below.
During the bourgeois democratic revolution, the communist party both publicly works with non-communist forces and simultaneously attempts to undermine them. In the early years of the people's democracies in Eastern Europe, the communist parties achieved this by forming broad national fronts led by themselves. Initially, the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia fostered collaboration with other political parties through the National Front. However, as time progressed, the party leveraged its control over it to marginalize these same parties. It chose this approach rather than making any overt attempt at seizing state power for itself. Consequently, there was a slow marginalisation of non-communist groups.
Klement Gottwald referred to this strategy as a dual tactic. He conveyed to party members that advocating for the tactics of the National Front and collaborating with other non-communist groups did not imply that the class struggle had stopped. It continued in a different form that was, according to Gottwald, more beneficial to the communist party.
Czechoslovak theorist Ivan Bystřina, in his book People’s Democracy, contends that during the early phase of the national and democratic revolution—what the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia officially referred to as their bourgeois democratic revolution—a temporary alliance with a specific part of the bourgeoisie was a strategic component of the party's National Front's tactics. He thought that this partnership represented a novel type of class struggle, one that benefited the proletariat.
Bystřina believed this form of class struggle had two overriding characteristics. The communist party sought to work with what they considered to be the democratic elements of the bourgeois. They supported these elements and aimed to identify and weaken the reactionary groups within the bourgeois. This was part of the communist strategy to liquidate these same groups at a later date. Secondly, the communist party sought to be the instigator of policies related to the revolution and the establishment of the people's democratic state. The leadership of the state was the main tool, according to Bystřina, used to reveal and marginalise the bourgeoisie.
The aim of dual tactics was to remove the bourgeois from the state by any means required and to convince the masses to support communism through peaceful and democratic means. In order to begin the transition toward the proletarian socialist revolution, the working class had to gain full control over all state positions of worth. This would finalise the isolation of the bourgeois from political authority, creating a favourable environment for the communists to gain support from the populace. This victory should be achieved, according to Jiří Houška and Karel Kára, through a democratic election in which the communists attain power. The election victory would signify the end of the bourgeois democratic revolution and the beginning of the proletarian socialist revolution.
To strengthen the achievements of the initial phase of the people's democratic revolution, the working class must, as Lenin described, eliminate the bourgeoisie to advance to the socialist phase of the revolution. As stated by Soviet theorists Pavel Yudin and Mark Rozental in their work, A Dictionary of Philosophy, a fundamental requirement for progressing towards a proletarian socialist revolution involved the violent dismantling of the bourgeois dictatorship and the establishment of a dictatorship of the proletariat. By establishing its own exclusive class dictatorship, the proletariat can utilize the state to liquidate capitalism and replace it with socialism, they argued.
According to Sobolev, the proletariat can liquidate capitalism by gradually weakening the bourgeoisie's material base. The key tool in this context is the nationalisation of major industries, banks, transportation systems, and foreign trade that were once the private property of the bourgeoisie. In doing so, the proletariat destroys the material base of the bourgeoisie and other social material forces hostile to the people's democratic revolution. Another benefit, according to Sobolev, is that these made the people in democratic states economically independent of the advanced capitalist states.
According to Sobolev, the success of the socialist revolution in the people's democratic states of Eastern Europe could be attributed to five factors. Firstly, the revolution took place at a moment when the correlation of forces was advantageous, both domestically and internationally. Secondly, it was not simply a coup d'état, but rather the culmination of the revolution itself. Thirdly, it comprised multiple distinct incidents that collectively formed the revolution. Fourthly, it arose from a combination of grassroots pressure from the populace and pressure from above by state institutions under proletarian control. Lastly, it was achieved without resorting to armed insurrection.


== People's democratic state ==


=== Basic definition ===
Soviet theorists outlined two broad, but similar, basic definitions of what people's democracy was. In 1955, Mark Rozental offered this definition: "People’s democracy is a new form of the political organisation ofsociety which was established in a number of countries of Europe and Asia as a result of both the destruction of Germany and Japan by an anti-fascist coalition standing under the leadership of the Soviet Union, and the victory of the national liberation movements." A year earlier, the Great Soviet Encyclopedia, gave another, but similar sounding one: "People's democracy is a form of political organisation of society the essence ofwhich, in accordance with concrete historical conditions, is either a dictatorship of the proletariat or a joint dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry." Rozental stresses the historical forces that brought these states into being, while the definition of the Great Soviet Encyclopedia gives more attention to the state's class character.
Non-communist scholars from Western states have given other definitions. For example, French academic George Vedel defines the people's democratic state as a "regime of a country which has not yet advanced toward socialism as far as the [Soviet Union], and cannot therefore be called 'soviet' in the proper meaning of the word." On the other hand, Georges Burdeau reaches this definition: "a regime of transition to a popular monocracy of a Marxist style which aims at the realisation of a communist revolution through orderly and legal means."


=== Class form of state power ===
The first orthodox theory of people's democracy was formulated by Soviet scholar E. S. Lazutkin, who concluded that the people's democratic state was similar to the socialist state of the Soviet Union, both being a form of the dictatorship of the proletariat. During the 5th Congress of the Bulgarian Communist Party, held on 18−25 December 1948, Grigor Dimitrov stated that after personal discussions with Stalin and other members of the Soviet Communist Party, he recognized that, according to Marxism–Leninism, the Soviet state and the people's democratic state represented two distinct organisational forms of state power, that is, forms of government, but they shared the same class character. In the people's democratic state, the proletariat acted as the ruling class and headed a broad alliance of the working masses from rural and urban areas. That meant this system was not identical to the Soviet dictatorship of the proletariat, but was a form of proletarian rule. Dimitrov also stressed that the class character of the state was primary to its organisational form, stating that states without a communist form of government could be reasonable be designated as people's democratic states because its content, the class character, "forms its flesh and blood. The content of the people's democracy is the dictatorship of the proletariat.
Like the dictatorship of the proletariat of the socialist state, the new proletarian form of class rule of the people's democratic state was tasked with transitioning society from capitalism to socialism. Dimitrov told the congress that the universal principles of history, when viewed through a historical materialist lens, do not significantly vary from country to country; they remain consistent. Thus, the only way to transition to socialism was by establishing a dictatorship of the proletariat and directing it against capitalism, similarly to what the Soviet Union had done. After Dimitrov's congress speech, it was followed by his counterparts in the other Eastern European communist states. Several theoretical works also followed up his speech on people's democracy, the most notable one being Naum Farberov's 1949 The State of People's Democracy, which was approved by the Soviet Ministry of Higher Education as a textbook for Soviet universities.
Farberov and Sobolev critiqued the earlier people's democratic theorists, especially Ilya Trainin and Eugen Varga, for their beliefs that the people's democratic state represented a third type of state, neither socialist nor capitalist. He countered that the people's democratic state had a socialist character, and the fact that these states operated a mixed economy did not alter this. The essential feature of these states was their proletarian class character and the fact that the socialist sector owned and operated the commanding heights of the economy. From then on, the hegemonic conception was that the people's democracies were a socialist type of state that was the product of people's democratic revolutions, which were also a form of socialist revolution. While Soviet theorists still admitted that there were differences between states, this was not due to them embarking on a unique national path but rather because the material base and superstructural relations were different. The path all these states were taking was, according to Farberov, the same road based on the same universal laws. As such, Faberov defined the people's democratic states as follows, "states of the toiling classes headed by the [proletariat], states which represent the transitional stage from capitalism to socialism, states of a new, socialist type".
Soviet theorist Boris Mankovsky reached the same conclusion as Farberov, stating that people's democracy was "states of the transition from capitalism to socialism, states in which socialism is being built." Like Farberov, Mankovsky defined the people's democratic state as a state of a socialist type since, like its Soviet counterpart, it was a transitory state that was under the rule of the working class. He also defined the people's democratic revolution as a socialist revolution that sought to carry out the same historical tasks. The key difference was that the people's democratic state also had to carry out several bourgeois-democratic responsibilities, such as the destruction of feudalism and the enactment of agrarian reform. However, the fact that the people's democratic state had to carry out capitalist policies did not make it less socialist: it was socialist since the working class led the state. He deemed it as anti-Marxist to call the people's democratic revolution a bourgeois democratic revolution.
Marxist economist Pyotr Figurnov argued that the main difference in the organisational form of state power between the Soviet socialist state and the people's democracies was the existence of other political parties. These parties formed a coalition that respected the communist party's role as the vanguard party of the working class and the toiling masses, and its monopoly on state power. This was perceived to be a multi-class coalition representing the vast majority of people in the people's democratic state. Despite these differences, Figurnov still believed the organisational form of state of power was a different form of the same type of state.
Dmitry Chesnokov asserted in 1948 that the Soviet state, as exemplified by Lenin and Stalin, was a superior socialist state type compared to the people's democracies. Chesnokov believed that the establishment of the dictatorship of the proletariat in people's democracies established a unique state type. People's democracy arose from the relationship and balance of class forces in those countries, as well as the political maturity of the working masses. Additionally, the global balance between socialism and imperialism, along with the various methods used by people in other countries to fight for socialism, also influenced its establishment.
Furthermore, Chesnokov noted that the leading role of the Soviet Union played a significant part in shaping how the dictatorship of the proletariat developed in Eastern Europe, resulting in the distinct class form of people's democracy. Chesnokov argued that this distinctive form of revolutionary state power showcased its capacity to fulfill the responsibilities of the dictatorship of the proletariat. However, the people's democratic state would have faced considerable difficulties if it tackled the challenges that emerged during the transition from capitalism to socialism without the backing and existence of the Soviet socialist state.


==== The historical tasks of the proletariat and the peasantry ====
However, despite stating that the people's democratic state was a state of the socialist type, theorists also believed that it had two different class characters. In its first phase, during the bourgeois democratic revolution, the class character of the state was called the revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry. Upon the completion of the bourgeois democratic revolution and its transition into a proletarian socialist revolution, the state's class character was changed into the dictatorship of the proletariat. The first phase was the shortest, lasting from 1944 to 1946/47. In this phase, the new people's democratic states instituted less oppressive policies against non-communist elements.
The revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry had, according to Boris Mankovsky, four historical tasks it needed to enforce to establish a dictatorship of the proletariat. Firstly, the people's democratic state in this class form needed to serve as a unifying force to overcome fascism and eliminate the remnants of feudalism. Secondly, it had to institute policies that weakened the material basis of capitalism. Thirdly, the state had to promote democracy in both social and economic aspects of life. Lastly, the state had to rebuild the national economy following the destruction caused by World War II. Naum Farberov proposed an additional task: the transformation of the material foundation, which consequently alters the class dynamics within society.
By 1948, in the majority of Eastern European people's democratic states, the dictatorship that included both the proletariat and peasantry evolved into a purely proletarian dictatorship. Sobolev outlined five necessary conditions that must be fulfilled to create a true proletarian dictatorship. To start with, the communist party needed to establish a monopoly on state power and have greater influence than any other non-communist party. Next, the bourgeoisie had to be eradicated as a material force, and all their representatives had to be removed from state positions. Additionally, all key state roles of significance had to be held by communists. Second to last, the state was required to take control of the commanding heights of the economy. Finally, the merger of the communist party with other non-communist workers' parties to form a single, unified Marxist−Leninist party.


=== The state as an instrument for the construction of socialism ===
According to Marxism−Leninism, the state has a defined social purpose. It reflects the material base and, by nature, a product of society. However, according to Marxism−Leninism, all state formations eventually develop autonomous powers of their own and become opposed to the society in which they operate. It eventually develops into an instrument of the incumbent ruling class to defend its own interests. As such, it develops into a coercive and repressive apparatus. Marxist−Leninists believe that all state formations before the socialist state are established and function to defend the exclusive interests of the sitting ruling class and exploit the other social classes of society.
Marxism−Leninism does admit that the socialist state under the dictatorship of the proletariat is also a coercive institution; however, unlike prior state formations, it is run in the interests of the vast majority since its main aim is to abolish class society (and not maintain it). The people's democratic state under the dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry is mostly focused on what Nikolay Aleksandrov refers to as the general tasks of democratisation and national liberation.
The people's democratic state under the dictatorship of the proletariat is generally recorded by Marxist−Leninists, such as Aleksandrov, as having three overriding functions: repression, education, and construction. By repression, they mean that the state defends the class form, that is, the class character of the state, from attempts to change it. By education, they mean the state tries to win over the popular masses to communist values. The last aspect, construction, means that the proletarian state is responsible for the construction of socialism and working for the general abolition of class society, which is commonly called communism.
Under the proletarian dictatorship, the people's democratic state was expected to fulfill the same functions as the Soviet state did when it transitioned to socialism, albeit with some modifications. Soviet theorist Pyotr Romashkin outlined six internal and two external traits of the Soviet socialist state. The six internal factors included, first, the suppression of those who opposed the communist regime. Second, the state's emphasis on economic and organisational matters. Third, the state regulates labour and consumption. Fourth, the safeguarding of socialist relations of production. Fifth, the state's cultural and educational initiatives. Finally, the protection of the legal rights and interests of citizens. The list was hierarchical, with the repression of the state's enemies deemed the most important.  The external traits were, firstly, the defense of peace, and secondly, military defense.
A key difference between the two state formations was the use of violence. Dmitry Chesnokov reasoned that the correlation of forces in international affairs made it possible for the people's democratic states to enact less repressive policies and use less violence than what the Soviet Union did. Aleksander Sobolev opposed Joseph Stalin's theory of the aggravation of class struggle under socialism, arguing that in the period of transition from capitalism to socialism, class struggle still exists, but it intensity was altogether lower.


=== Organisational form of state power ===
The Soviet Union's organisational form of state power, that is, its form of government, was inspired by Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels, and Lenin's writings on assembly government. This later developed into the unified state power of the supreme state organ of power, often referred to as legislatures by Western observers. In this model, the supreme state organ of power has unlimited state power, except for the limitations it sets on itself, which means that it can meddle in the activities of all other state organs. The supreme state organ of power is elected through a popular vote controlled by the communist party that produces a state system in which the government, the executive organ of the state, and other state organs, such as the judiciary, are subservient to the supreme state organ of power. As the state system of the Soviet Union explicitly opposed the separation of powers.
The constitutions adopted by the people's democratic states were very similar to their Soviet counterpart. The two most original constitutions were the new Czechoslovak constitution and the constitution of East Germany, which, unlike the Soviet Union, had an individual head of state. The Czechoslovak presidency, while elected by the Czechoslovak supreme state organ of power, had real powers that affected the operation of the state machinery. All the Eastern European people's democratic states established supreme state organs of power that stood above the constitutional system: since it held the unified power of the state, no other state organs could hold it accountable and it could amend the constitution as it pleased.
Bolesław Bierut, the first secretary of the Central Committee of the Polish United Workers' Party, upon the adoption of Poland's first communist constitution on 22 July 1952, told the assembled delegates of the supreme state organ of power that the separation of powers was "artificial and contrary to the principles of democracy". Instead of separating powers, Poland established a uniform state system in which all powers emanated from the lowest-level state organs of power to the supreme state organ of power, that is, unified state power.


=== Classification ===
At first, the new European communist states were called new democracies. According to Soviet Hungarian theorist Eugen Varga, there existed five new democratic states in 1946: Albania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Poland, and Yugoslavia. Another Soviet theorist, Naum Farberov, listed Albania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Mongolia, North Korea, Poland, and Romania as people's democratic states in 1949 while removing Yugoslavia due to the Tito–Stalin split of 1948. Farberov did not include, for whatever reason, China and East Germany in his list. In 1959, the Soviet Union officially recognised 11 states as people's democracies: Albania, Bulgaria, China, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, Mongolia, North Korea, Poland, Romania, and Vietnam.
The Lao People's Revolutionary Party (LPRP) seized power through a people's national democratic revolution. It established a Laotian communist state on 2 December 1975, which it self-designated as a people's democratic state. The first Laotian communist constitution, adopted in 1990, declared it a people's democratic state based on the multi-ethnic Laotian people of all social strata with the workers, farmers and intelligentsia as the state's primary class foundation. The party declared its foundational aim was to establish socialism in Laos at its 5th LPRP Congress, held in 1991.


== References ==


=== Books ===


=== Book entries ===


=== Journal entries ===


=== Thesis ===


=== Footnotes ===