
==== Bagmati Province ====
Chitwan District - The Free Student Union leadership at Janadarsha Multiple Campus in Rapti Municipality was elected unopposed. Out of the remaining 13 affiliated colleges where elections where scheduled, only one held the election as planned (Shaheed Smarak College in Shardanagar). NSU won the election at Shaheed Smarak College. The elections where postponed in all other affiliated colleges.


==== Gandaki Province ====
Nawalpur District - Together the ANNFSU and ANNFSU (Unified Socialist) padlocked 9 out of 10 campuses in Nawalpur District, disrupting the elections there. At the Janamakhi Adarsh Campus in Gaindakot the padlock was lifted after a consensus was reached - NSU panel was elected unanimously, whilst NSU, ANNFSU, ANNFSU (Unified Socialist) and ANNISU(R) unanimously shared the Proportional Representation seats.


==== Koshi Province ====
Bhojpur District - ANNFSU won the presidency at Shadananda Multiple Campus in Dingla.
Dhankuta District - NSU won the election at Jitpur Campus unopposed. ANNFSU won the elections at Hille Campus and Jalpadevi Campus unopposed. NSU won the elections at Gokundeshwar Campus and Budhuk Campus.
Ilam District - At in Garuva Multiple Campus in Mai and Ektappa Multiple Campus in Phakphokthum NSU won the elections unopposed. ANNFSU won the election at Mangalbare Multiple Campus in Deumai unopposed.
Jhapa District - There were 10,301 eligible voters at 11 affiliated campuses in Jhapa District were FSU elections were being held. The largest electorate was present at Damak Multiple Campus, with 3,702 eligible voters. 10 student organisations took part in the election at Damak Multiple Campus. ANNFSU won the elections at Tridev Multiple Campus, Gauradaha Multiple Campus and Sita Ramesh Multiple Campus (Budhabare). NSU won the elections at Damak Multiple Campus, Kakarvitta Multiple Campus, Gaurigung Multiple Campus, Kankai Adarsha Campus, Indra Chandra Campus, Kankai Multiple Campus (Surunga) and Shanishchare Multiple Campus (Arjundhara). At Garamani Campus in Birtamod, which had the smallest electorate in the district with only 90 eligible voters, the National Democratic Student Organisation won the presidency with 23 votes against 8 votes for NSU and 6 votes for ANNFSU.
Khotang District - No FSU election was held at any of the 7 affiliated campuses in the district. ANNFSU had protested a measure allowing only students enrolled by January 24, 2025 to be included in the voters list at Diktel Multiple Campus. The Election Commission failed to reach an agreement with the student organisations, and the vote was cancelled at all seven campuses.
Morang District -  ANNISU(R) won the elections at the Ramailo Campus in Kanepokhari and the Miklajung Campus in Morang. NSU won the elections at the Urlabari Campus in Urlabari, Letang Campus and the Pathari Multiple Campus in Morang. ANNFSU won the election at the Khadam Campus in Kerabari. At Sukuna Multiple Campus ANNFSU candidate Elis Ojha, supported by all communist factions, won the presidency with 985 votes against 686 for the NSU candidate. Elis Ojha's panel won 8 out of 10 proportional representation seats. There were 3,682 eligible voters at the campus. At Belbari Multiple Campus the election was postponed to March 22. When the election was held at Belbari Multiple Campus ANNISU(R) won the posts of president and treasurer whilst ANNFSU won the post of secretary.
Panchthar District - At Panchthar Multiple Campus the NSU presidential candidate was supported by ANNISU(R), the Federal Students Union and the National Democratic Students Organisation. The ANNFSU candidate was supported by ANNFSU (Unified Socialist) and another Federal Students Union. The NSU candidate won with 196 votes against 137 votes for the ANNFSU candidate. ANNISU(R) won the post of secretary and NSU the post of treasurer.
Sankhuwasabha District - ANNFSU presidential candidate elected unopposed at Sankhuwasabha Multiple Campus. At the remaining 3 campuses in the district only NSU, ANNFSU and ANNISU(R) fielded candidates. ANNFSU won the election at Madi Multiple Campus. NSU won the election at Barun Multiple Campus.
Solukhumbu District - NSU won the election at Dudhakoshi Multiple Campus. The election was postponed at Sotang Public Campus, after ANNISU(R) padlocked the campus in protest of fake voters being registered.
Sunsari District - NSU won the elections at Sunsari Multiple Campus, Mahendra Multiple Campus, Purwanchal Campus and Saptakoshi Multiple Campus. ANNFSU won the election at the Pindeshwor Campus.
Taplejung District - At the Pathibhara Multiple Campus in Phungling the NSU, ANNFSU and ANNISU(R) reached an agreement and a joint panel was elected unopposed. NSU got the post of president, ANNFSU the post of secretary and ANNISU(R) the post of treasurer.
Tehrathum District - The election at Tehrathum Multiple Campus was postponed. In the end NSU, ANNFSU and ANNISU(R) reached a power-sharing deal shortly before the April 2, 2025 deadline, avoiding to hold an election. NSU got the post of president, ANNFSU the post of secretary and ANNISU(R) the post of treasurer.
Udayapur District - Elections were postponed in two out of three campuses with Free Student Union structures in the district, Triyuga Janata Multiple Campus in Motigada and Baruwa Campus in Gaighat, due to conflicts between student organisations. At Narad Adarsh Campus in Chaudandigadhi Municipality NSU, ANNISU(R) and the Socialist Students Union, Nepal formed a joint panel, whilst ANNFSU contested alone. ANNISU(R) won the presidency at Nadar Adarsh Campus.


==== Sudurpashchim Province ====
Baitadi District - NSU won the presidency at the Gram Prakash Multiple Campus Sarmali in Baitadi and the Shrikot Multiple Campus Khochalek. At the Setigaun Multiple Campus Gokuleshwar a joint NSU-ANNISU(R) candidate was elected president.
Bajhang District - NSU, ANNFSU and ANNFSU (Unified Socialist) won the presidential posts at Triveni Aardash Campus Bijgada, Sunkuda Campus and Jhota Bajhangdeep Campus respectively.
Doti District - ANNISU(R) won the presidency at Kedar Surya Multiple Campus Bipinagar. The ANNISU(R) candidate got 46 votes, whilst the NSU candidate got 37 votes. ANNFSU won the post of secretary, defeating the NSU candidate. NSU the post of treasurer, defeating the ANNISU(R) candidate.
Kailali District - at Phulbari Campus in Kailali NSU won the presidency, defeating the ANNFSU candidate. Akhil Samajbadi won the post of secretary and ANNISU(R) the post of treasurer at the Phulbari Campus. Likewise NSU won the posts of FSU president at Mahunyal Multiple Campus Bhajani, Raghunath Adarsh ​​Multiple Campus, Birendra Vidya Mandir and Aishwarya Buhumukhi Campus. ANNISU(R) won the FSU presidency at Lamki Multiple Campus, National College Sukhkhar, Bulbule Campus and Khaptad Multiple Campus Masuria.
Kanchanpur District - NSU won the president post at Janata Multiple Campus in Punarbas, Kanchan Multiple Campus, Bhanu Multiple Campus of Dodhara Chandani and Rauleshwor Janata Adarsh ​​Multiple Campus in Beldandi. ANNISU(R) won the presidential post at Mahakali Multiple Campus in Belauri. At Rampur Multiple Campus in Belauri, a campus with 14 students, 13 students voted. The ANNISU(R) candidate Rabina Rana was elected president with 8 votes.
--Soman (talk) 19:54, 26 April 2025 (UTC)

@Soman With all due respect to your work, does this meet GNG? Student union elections would not, IMHO, be usually notable, and this is in Nepal... With no article for Free Student Union or Free Student Union elections, this in-detail overview of a single election strikes me as very dubious; if it was not written by you, I'd send it to AfD ASAP. Agian, I respect your work a lot, but this one just looks so... not notable. Would you mind telling me: which of the sources cited 1) are indepenent (not student news) 2) would meet SIGCOV? In particular, going beyond reporting results? PS. Maybe a way to save your work here would be to create an entry on Free Student Union and merge this event there, as part of its history? Piotr Konieczny aka Prokonsul Piotrus| reply here 03:42, 13 May 2025 (UTC)

Hi Piotrus. I think it is easy to assert WP:GNG here. None of the coverage is from 'student news', we have two articles from The Himalayan Times, nine articles from Kantipur (daily), two articles from Kathmandu Post, six articles from Naya Patrika, three articles from Gorkhapatra, one article from Rajdhani (newspaper), three articles from Republica (newspaper), one from Nagarik (daily), two articles from Annapurna Post. Thus this specific election is covered indepth in multiple articles in the main media outlets of the country. We have the former Prime Minister commenting on the election result, we have details how the election played role in the internal disputes in the national governing party. We have wordings like "Prithvi Narayan Campus is the largest campus of TU, and since the FSU of Prithvi Narayan Campus has a history of producing prominent political leaders the ballot there is given national attention."
As to there not being a FSU article... Wikipedia is incomplete and the notability of one article cannot be assessed by the absence of another. Now FSU is not a single organization, FSU is a collective phenomenon of local campus student councils. --Soman (talk) 10:05, 18 May 2025 (UTC)
'This is in Nepal', 'at a Nepalese university'... These remarks come across as rather chauvinistic and arrogant, frankly. The apparent premise is that Nepal is self-evidently a particularly insignificant country (compared with what?). This is a nation of almost 30 million people, which is significantly higher than the average for Europe and not much smaller than, say, Poland's population.--62.73.72.3 (talk) 10:17, 13 June 2025 (UTC)