By May 16, 2023, 100 editors signed a petition requesting the following change to the arbitration policy to be submitted for ratification by the community. As per the formal ratification policy, this community referendum is a simple "yes" or "no" vote on whether the amendment is to be adopted. This amendment to the arbitration policy will enter into force once it receives majority support, with at least one hundred editors voting in favour of adopting it. Until this amendment is ratified, the existing arbitration policy remains in effect.

Procedural discussions can be found on the talk page. Discussion on the amendment itself should take place here. 
I just want to thank Barkeep49 for their excellent, well reasoned, explanation behind their vote.  I am not convinced to change my vote for reasons unrelated to their rationale, but I think if more people had that kind of things to say about this situation, it would make it feel less like a witch hunt.  --Jayron32 14:59, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
@Barkeep49: I'm curious, were you aware that Icewhiz did appeal his ArbCom sanction to Jimmy? (And didn't fool him – that was the appeal I alluded to in my vote). I realise it doesn't invalidate your hypothetical scenario of him appealing with his sockpuppet, it's just an interesting choice. – Joe (talk) 15:24, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
I was aware Joe. Esotrix, someone who was on path to be easily on track to be elected by the community to adminship, was far more sympathetic at the time of the appeal to ArbCom than Icewhiz was when he made his appeal to Jimmmy. And crucially I think Esotrix fit the profile of the type of person Jimmy likes to advocate for far more than Icewhiz did. Best, Barkeep49 (talk) 15:43, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
I dunno about that ­– he was the same person, after all. Icewhiz-as-Icewhiz was also quite charming, until he wasn't. But thanks for the reply. – Joe (talk) 15:47, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
It's interesting that so far both supporters and opposers are focused on a hypothetical "rogue ArbCom" scenario, even though everyone seems to agree that is extraordinarily unlikely. A more likely scenario is that someone appeals a part of a decision they think is incorrect or unfair and, if he agrees that the committee made a mistake, Jimmy amends it. We know that this is the more realistic function of the appeals provision because that's what it's actually been used for (I have no idea where this idea that it is "never used" comes from). – Joe (talk) 15:50, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
New ArbComs overturn old arbcom decisions all the time including because the new ArbCom disagrees with the judgement of the old arbcom. This normally is done subtly but one clear example of a new committee overruling an old committee is the departing 2020 ArbCom voting to open a Warsaw Concentration Case and the new 2021 ArbCom voting to close it by motion. But the substance of my support remains that the judgement of elected arbs is far more likely to lead to a good result, and crucially a result accepted by the community, than the judgement of a single person and in this case a single person who isn't as in touch with the community as he was when he exercised those powers. Best, Barkeep49 (talk) 15:55, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
The fundamental logic of an appeals process is that even the most competent bodies make mistakes, and everybody with authority benefits from the prospect of someone looking at their working. In practice, the fact that Jimmy has apparently only amended an ArbCom decision once in twenty years suggests that he does defer to the judgement of the committee by default. And being detached from the community can be a good thing. We all know that we have a susceptibility to groupthink around here; ArbCom is no exception. Jimmy's (perhaps unique?) strength is that he has a deep knowledge of our norms and principles but is no longer engaged in day-to-day wikipolitics. I'm imagining an unpopular editor who is unfairly sanction by an ArbCom that was too overworked to properly look at the evidence. Are they going to be able to convince 'the community' to overrule it? Or the next iteration of ArbCom? They might have a shot in appealing to Jimmy. – Joe (talk) 16:17, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
It's a little galling but unfortunately not entirely surprising that one of the oppose !votes just boils down to "I don't like ArbCom, therefore Jimbo must have emergency powers". Reminds me of how some RfAs get opposed due to bewildering personal issues outside the candidate's control. ⛵ WaltClipper -(talk) 15:57, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
He is also an ex-arbitrator, so he has some experience on the point. Izno (talk) 16:53, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
At the petition phase of this process, I was skeptical because I do believe some kind of "safety valve" or check on the Arbitration Committee is needed outside of annual elections. However, Galobtter made a convincing argument that the community possesses a kind of "nuclear option", if you will, in that it can overrule ArbCom or even completely dissolve ArbCom using the very same ARBPOL amendment procedure that we are using for the current discussion—I've written up a brief essay at User:Mz7/Nuclear option with a few examples of what such a "nuclear option" strategy might look like. After thinking about this, I have satisfied myself that this is indeed a sufficient "safety valve" that can replace Jimbo Wales in his current self-defined role of protecting the community from the unlikely scenario of an off-the-rails ArbCom. (In fact, I am now worried because, now that the community has discovered it has this ability, it might be emboldened to try it out in the near future on frivolous things. As I noted on the talk page of the petition phase, the ARBPOL procedure sets an inexplicably low bar for ratification—despite having more steps, it is somehow easier to pass amendments to ARBPOL than to pass amendments to other policies.)  Mz7 (talk) 17:36, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
I'm glad what I said made sense. I think frivolous appeals would fail at the petition stage, but I do agree that now that the community has actually considered and come up with this safety valve, that people might try. We do need to overhaul the amendment process, and having a higher bar than 51% of the community seems reasonable (but that's a conversation for later). Galobtter (talk) 18:33, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
I'd like to add that the committee itself has the ability to call for a special election in the event that the total number of active arbs becomes very low, and has the ability to remove individual arbitrators. So, it is only in the incredibly unlikely case of the entire committee completely losing its way and completely ignoring the community that such a safety valve would ever really be needed. While I'm not personally convinced that we even need this, I am more than convinced that it obviously should not just be any one person. Beeblebrox (talk) 18:43, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
I really don't get how this "safety valve" thought experiment has become the main issue here. The provision we're talking about removing is that remedies may be appealed to, and amended, by Jimbo Wales. All it has ever been used for is parties appealing specific actions by the committee, and all that he has ever done in response is to endorse the original decision or amend it (once). What does it have to do with dissolving ArbCom or calling new elections? If I appeal something in the real world, it means I'm asking someone to review a decision that I think was in error, not seeking to overthrow the body that made it. – Joe (talk) 05:53, 18 May 2023 (UTC)
@Joe Roe The whole safety valve thing comes from a comment Jimbo made here which was linked in the original petition. It was he who really brought in the whole idea of a safety valve and dissolving ArbCom etc, not us. Galobtter (talk) 05:58, 18 May 2023 (UTC)
That's unfortunate. As you said yourself in that discussion, he doesn't even have that power under the current version of WP:ARBPOL. It does feel like a lot of people are now voting based on a misconception of what the policy currently allows for (even though Nosebagbear stated it quite clearly at the top). In retrospect, it would have been nice to start this proposal with a background section explaining where the appeals provision comes from and how it has been used historically. Too late for that now, I suppose. – Joe (talk) 06:28, 18 May 2023 (UTC)
At the same time, if Jimbo shares that misconception (/I believe the source for the whole "he can dismiss the committee" is himself) and is not willing to accept ordinary appeals, it seems realistic to vote based on what he says he will use the power for rather than what you want him to to use the power for (which seems to be fixing misguided ArbCom decisions caused by groupthink/misreading evidence etc). The fact that people make ordinary appeals is immaterial if he is not going to accept ordinary appeals. Galobtter (talk) 06:34, 18 May 2023 (UTC)
Of course we should he consider how he says he would use the power. But we should equally consider how he has used it. If we're talking about me personally, I don't think I'm voting based on what I want Jimmy to do. I'm voting based on a combination of what the text actually says and how I've seen it used in practice (most notably when a decision I voted on was appealed to Jimmy, and he handled it very fairly). – Joe (talk) 07:10, 18 May 2023 (UTC)
My concern is – since we're talking about incredibly unlikely scenarios – what if a hypothetical rogue ArbCom managed to get the WMF on-side? The Foundation has supreme power over us, from a technical point of view; they could shut down any discussion or petition before it got off the ground. Jimmy has more influence over the WMF than the rest of the community combined; if he personally overturned an ArbCom decision, the WMF would be unlikely to act against him. And contrary to what Barkeep said above, I think Jimmy's influence over the WMF, at least in matters related to en.wiki governance, will be diminished if we tell the WMF that we don't place any trust in him ourselves. Sojourner in the earth (talk) 19:06, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
I suppose it comes down to who you think is more likely to "go rogue": 15(ish) elected arbitrators plus a substantial number of vetted WMF staffers/board members, or Jimbo Wales? And that's in no way a dig at Jimbo Wales himself. I think I'd trust the odds of the former against any individual. Ajpolino (talk) 19:28, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
I recommend reviewing groupthink. I personally trust some individuals more than any committees. Can you imagine if automobile traffic was steered by committees? Or if surgeries were led by group discussion and any given consensus or majority rule process? What if Congress was in charge of when to launch nuclear missiles? Would you like your parachute packing outsourced to the lowest bidding company? What if airline pilots had to get clearance from their supervisor before executing a go-around on a rough landing? If you are in the United States, then you probably know what it is like having your personal M.D.'s orders denied by your insurance company. Sandizer (talk) 19:39, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
Can you imagine if automobile traffic was steered by committees? How do you think traffic planning decisions are made?  Modern infrastructure works precisely because it is centrally planned and most people who use it agree to follow those central rules; most traffic accidents are a consequence of either individual screw-ups, or deliberate individual choices to ignore those rules.  Individual autonomy is good in situations where split-second reactions are necessary (so cars are driven by individuals, and surgeries are carried out by individuals) but larger structural decisions where there is time for deliberation is better carried out by experienced groups (your surgeon is trained according to standards set by a licensing body; roads are planned by committee and traffic laws are set by committee).  ArbCom's job isn't to drive you to work in the morning; it is to make decisions about how the rules of the road apply. Caeciliusinhorto (talk) 20:04, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
I would choose a different metaphor. There are Supreme Court decisions I really dislike. But I can't imagine letting a single person (even one I liked and trusted) be able to overrule them. I instead prefer our current system where a bad decision can be overturned by a later court or by Congress passing a new law or, in some circumstances, by Constitutional Amendment. Barkeep49 (talk) 19:49, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
I think these analogies confuse the issue. We're all using the word "trust" without really defining what that means in this specific situation. Trust is complicated; there are people whom I would trust with my life but whom I wouldn't trust to hold a five-pound note for me. In this case, what I mean is that I trust Jimmy not to overrule ArbCom without a global consensus at his back, especially now that he has explicitly said he wouldn't do that. I can't extend the same level of trust to a group of hypothetical future arbitrators, or to a corporation. Sojourner in the earth (talk) 20:20, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
I think these hypotheticals are starting to get too wild to take seriously. The intervention of the WMF in community matters has been a hotly discussed topic for some time now, and we are already experimenting with a system of checks and balances on that front, see foundation:Policy:Office actions#Appeals. Mz7 (talk) 19:34, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
I realize you are primarily talking about the bounds of social dynamics in the status quo, but in the most vulgar scenario, the Board could literally just not reappoint him or throw him out and then use their unilateral control of the infrastructure to do whatever they want. In that light I don't really find this kind of in extremis argument convincing. InsaneHacker (💬) 19:48, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
Well, if the community can't handle certain disputes that eventually end up at ArbCom, why should we believe the community is qualified to dissolve ArbCom when they disagree with ArbCom's decisions? We'd get caught in a circle of disputes with no foreseeable end. Nythar (💬-🍀) 19:30, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
@Mz7 and Galobtter: As I said above, I think it's a unfortunate that discussion has centered on hypothetical constitutional crisis scenarios, instead of the types of appeals we know are more realistic because they have actually happened. Do you think the "nuclear option" option would be helpful in a case where one party to an ArbCom case had been sanctioned based on a misreading of evidence, for example? I find it hard to imagine that someone could mobilise 100+ people to care, even if the decision was manifestly unfair. – Joe (talk) 04:17, 18 May 2023 (UTC)
The discussion has focused on those constitutional crisis cases because Jimbo specifically stated he would only use his power in such cases. It sounds like you want to see there exist a body that reviews ArbCom more actively, but Jimbo simply isn’t that. Mz7 (talk) 06:59, 18 May 2023 (UTC)
@Mz7: It's not about what I want to see, but about what actually has happened. I can't say why Jimbo is taking that position now (he did add the caveat there can also be mistakes in attempting to take out flexibility by pre-defining every possible circumstance), but three years ago he was happy to accept an appeal of a decision I voted on, in just such a scenario, and actively reviewed it. – Joe (talk) 08:24, 18 May 2023 (UTC)
He's been taking that position since 2004, actually. When he established the Arbitration Committee in 2004, he sent this email to wikien-l where he wrote, ... I reserve the right of executive clemency and indeed even to dissolve the whole thing if it turns out to be a disaster.  But I regard that as unlikely, and I plan to do it about as often as the Queen of England dissolves Parliament against their wishes, i.e. basically never, but it is one last safety valve for our values. Even in the 2019 discussion you linked, he rejected the appeal on the basis that We need to trust and support our elected ArbCom, and believe me, I stand ready whenever necessary to exercise my (theoretical?) reserve powers to call an election if I see a power-mad ArbCom going off the rails.  We are very very far from that situation today. Mz7 (talk) 09:17, 18 May 2023 (UTC)
Then it really sounds to me like what's motivating this amendment is a problem with a reserve power that isn't written in ARBPOL and which probably hasn't existed outside of Jimmy's head since at least 2011, rather than the one it actually proposes to remove. – Joe (talk) 10:08, 18 May 2023 (UTC)
See I think something very different Joe: I think we're giving someone a large amount of power who doesn't understand what power he actually has. What kind of cluster would it be if he decided an appeal had merit and "ruled" on it by disbanding ArbCom? The group that we'd normally call on to resolve an issue like this would be unsuitable by definition. Best, Barkeep49 (talk) 14:04, 18 May 2023 (UTC)
That's a very fair point. That response from Jimmy was regrettable, and I suppose he shouldn't be surprised that has come to this. Still, I hope we can come up with another way to provide external oversight of ArbCom. – Joe (talk) 14:13, 18 May 2023 (UTC)
@Sandizer: What relevance does the alleged disrespectfulness of the petitioners have for the normative merit of the proposal? InsaneHacker (💬) 19:26, 17 May 2023 (UTC)

Basic human decency and more importantly here, essential evidence of being able to work well with others in a collaborative environment. For the sake of argument, suppose Thanos had a compelling ecological reason for the destruction of 50% of all life -- is his lack of respect for those unfortunate individuals relevant to the normative merit of his choice? Sandizer (talk) 19:39, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
You could just as easily abstract respect for [the life of] those unfortunate individuals away from the question of character and simply say that there is a countervailing interest dictating not to destroy 50% of humans, e.g., the incommensurable value of human life. You are, in essence, backloading that normative position — which exists independent of the question of his moral character — into the phrase lack of respect for.
If I said "suppose an all-powerful Gordon Gekko had a compelling hedonistic reason for deciding that all natural resources could be freely and extremely intensely exploited even if it lead to the destruction of all ecosystems in the long term — is his lack of respect for the ecosystem relevant to the normative merit of his choice?" I too would be 'disguising' the normative position that the long-term survival of Earth is more important than short-term pleasure — which exists independent of his character — as a question about the relevance of his state of mind.
With that said, what is the nexus between the fact that the petitioners have apparently been rude, and whether or not this policy — as written — would be good for the Encyclopedia? InsaneHacker (💬) 20:37, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
That is a much easier question. I have every reason to believe and no reason to doubt that collaboration would have produced a superior proposal. Sandizer (talk) 21:00, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
This amendment ends the role of Jimbo Wales in appeals from the Arbitration Committee. Had the proponents and Jimbo collaborated, they would either have composed something that a) did the same thing or b) retained some role for Jimbo. As one who favors community autonomy, I favor eliminating Jimbo's role in arbitration appeals and would like less a proposal that retained a role for Jimbo . Therefore, at least from my perspective, they couldn't have come up with something superior to what is there. At best they would have tied. Wehwalt (talk) 21:13, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
@Snowmanonahoe: Have you considered that some people might just consider a mechanism like this undesirable regardless of whether the person involved is Jimmy Wales or someone else? A good portion of the supporters are talking about the mechanism completely abstracted from Jimmy Wales as a person. InsaneHacker (💬) 19:26, 17 May 2023 (UTC)

@InsaneHacker: I have considered that, and I disagree with it. Snowmanonahoe (talk · contribs · typos) 19:30, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
@Snowmanonahoe: 'Disagree' in what sense? I stated that some people might just consider a mechanism like this undesirable regardless. I'm assuming you don't mean that literally no one is motivated by this? InsaneHacker (💬) 19:37, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
@InsaneHacker: I mean that I personally find the mechanism desirable. All power needs oversight, no matter how trustworthy someone may be, no exceptions. Snowmanonahoe (talk · contribs · typos) 19:39, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
@Snowmanonahoe: I completely agree in the abstract, but we quickly arrive at infinite regress.
P1 — ArbCom has power, and power needs oversight, no matter how trustworthy they are, so we give Jimmy Wales the power to overturn their decisions
P2 — Now Jimmy Wales has power, and power needs oversight, no matter how trustworthy he is, so we give n3 the power to overturn his decisions
P3 — Now n3 has power, and power needs oversight, no matter how trustworthy n3 is, so we give n4 the power to overturn its decisions
Continue ad infinitum
In the real world, the buck stops somewhere. To me it seems like your argument is that you are fine with the buck stopping at Jimmy Wales rather than abstract considerations about oversight. And that's fine, but the argument made by those in favor of removing this provision — or indeed hypothetical persons who might want to absolve ArbCom in favor of dispute resolution at AN/I — is just that the buck should stop 1 or 2 steps earlier, respectively. The central question should thus be the merits of stopping at each step. Those in favor of removal presumably trust the aggregate character of ArbCom in most cases or at least the hypothetical ability for the community to pull the emergency brake in really bad cases via the amendment procedure, while (some) of those against removal presumably put more faith in the character of Jimmy Wales or at least his ability to reason in these cases. Either are defensible for different reasons, but I think it's misleading to make it a question about the abstract presence or lack of oversight. InsaneHacker (💬) 20:11, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
@Snowmanonahoe:, this is what I'm proposing: An emergency council with extremely experienced and trustworthy users in case there's significant disapproval with ArbCom's decision, and/or ArbCom didn't have extremely clear consensus. They won't do anything most of the time, but in the event this happens, that committee/council would come and make a decision. We won't have one person with that power, yet we have an option if something goes wrong. ‍ ‍ Helloheart ‍  ‍  02:00, 18 May 2023 (UTC)
@Barnards.tar.gz: Given that there is a process for removing our monarch should he cross a line, his power is in fact checked. I realize this is quite ironic given my preceding two comments, but if the accusations that this whole thing is just the foaming mob coming for Jimbo are true, wouldn't that then make this a use of the very check you are mentioning? I realize that you might be responding to those who are against the current policy in the abstract, but if we assume this is in fact a reaction to recent events, is your argument that this situation is not one worthy of using the check for? InsaneHacker (💬) 19:26, 17 May 2023 (UTC)

What I’m saying is that the existence of a process to remove Jimbo makes the accusation of him being a king/dictator overblown. If and when he crosses a line, by all means remove him by this process. But until then, there is value in having an extra dimension of pluralism, even if it is only symbolic in practice. Barnards.tar.gz (talk) 20:00, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
there is value in having an extra dimension So why not yet another? And another? There must be a final instance, by necessity. A point frequently overlooked is that this final instance already exists, and it is neither ArbCom nor Jimbo. It's the community. Should an invading alien strike force succeed in taking over WMF and ArbCom and sufficiently many admins, then the community can take its shit and fork off. We're not chained to our superstructure. The content, the encyclopedia this community is about, is free. No one can fence it off.
We must have a final instance, and there is no good argument for making a single person it. We're fellow travelers, not subjects and rulers. Paradoctor (talk) 21:15, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
@Fram: Is saying Wales "has had all his other powers (admin tools here and at Commons, checkuser/oversight, ...) already removed because he caused problems with them" (emphasis added) truthful or misleading? Sandizer (talk) 19:39, 17 May 2023 (UTC)

Truthful. Fram (talk) 20:15, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
False. He asked for an explanation, found out that he was mistaken, and made the learning curve. Then people piled on him. Sad. Randy Kryn (talk) 22:12, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
Truthful. Indisputably so. ⛵ WaltClipper -(talk) 23:13, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
I would note that in the wake of the most recent dust-up he asked for his remaining privileges to be removed, except for the toothless "Founder" bit.  But the context of that request was certainly that he had (once again) screwed up and was being taken to task for it. Beyond My Ken (talk) 23:28, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
What tools did he misuse?  --Jayron32 11:12, 18 May 2023 (UTC)
False. The recent episode did not involve the use of admin tools, hence he did not cause problems with [his other powers]. * Pppery * it has begun... 23:47, 17 May 2023 (UTC)
A united community disagreeing with the arbitration committee isn't likely to be a problematic governance scenario. As long as there is a clear consensus, the bureaucrats and stewards will be able to respond accordingly. Even in the case of the WMF disagreeing with the community, eventually the WMF will decide how it wants to proceed (historically, it finds a different approach that enough of the community can live with), and the community will decide if it wants to leave or stay. The doomsday governance problem is both the community and the admins being split, and the admins considering the issue fundamental enough to be willing to get into a block war, or just retire en masse. Short of this, there are counterbalancing forces that will slow down disputes and allow a truce to be enacted. (In the doomsday case, mainspace editing might have to be blocked while the community selects a new set of admins.)
I think the ability to appeal decisions based on private requests or private information is a significant concern. However I feel the mechanisms that have arisen since the enactment of the arbitration policy are more suitable courses of action. isaacl (talk) 23:58, 17 May 2023 (UTC)

I'm a little surprised that anyone thinks there should be any one person with this kind of power, much less for life. If Jimbo became somehow completely and permanently unavailable for this function tomorrow, would those opposing this be suggesting we need to hold an election to replace him in this capacity? Valereee (talk) 10:48, 18 May 2023 (UTC)
Maybe some of us are more used to the idea than others. More seriously, I don't see it is a lot of power in practice. Not much more than an admin or crat, who are also there for life (and for many from the early days, with no more of democratic appointment process). If Jimbo ever can't or won't perform this function, I can immediately think of a few of long-term arbs emeritus who the community could probably get behind as a replacement. – Joe (talk) 13:59, 18 May 2023 (UTC)
The reserve powers in the Commonwealth, though, aren't used to hear appeals of cabinet, legislative, or court decisions. isaacl (talk) 14:59, 18 May 2023 (UTC)
Technically they can, which is what Joe was getting at. – John M Wolfson (talk • contribs) 15:01, 18 May 2023 (UTC)
Individuals appealing to the monarch isn't an option written in the constitution, unlike the arbitration policy having an appeal path to a specific person. isaacl (talk) 15:21, 18 May 2023 (UTC)
A common action among Commonwealth members gaining political maturity is to patriate the final judicial authority and establish a supreme court rather than relying on an outside court such as the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council. Rather than rely on outsiders with only passing knowledge of local conditions, they did it themselves. In a way, in having the community be the check on the Arbs rather than Jimbo, we're doing that, showing our increasing political maturity. Wehwalt (talk) 15:04, 18 May 2023 (UTC)
Yes, as I alluded to in my support statement, I feel more comfortable with staffed positions, so there is a replacement process in place. With just a single person, there's a higher chance of that person not being available at the time when the role is needed. isaacl (talk) 15:05, 18 May 2023
I could get behind a "Governor General of the English Wikipedia" rather than an arbitrary historical monarch like Jimmy. – John M Wolfson (talk • contribs) 15:10, 18 May 2023 (UTC)


=== Arbitrary break ===
Reading over the discussion above, so many people have made excellent points on both sides, it's really difficult for me to figure out where I stand on this.  Here's my thoughts.  I mean no ill-will to Jimmy, or to arbcom, or anybody else, and apologize in advance if some of this makes it seem that way.
I think the recent bust-up over Jimmy's questioning of Bradv was excessive.  Jimmy's approach was a bit naive and tone-deaf, perhaps even clueless.  I'm guilty of all of those on occasion.  Arbcom need not tread where trout are sufficient to handle the problem.
It's clear that we need some sort of safety against either a hypothetical future rogue arbcom, or one which just plain went down a wrong path.  It was only a few years ago that there were so many inactive arbs that it was in danger of no longer being able to conduct effective deliberations.  A small number of arbs could have been a majority taking us in a bad direction that a larger group might not have gone.  Anytime we're in a situation where an arbcom decision needs to be overturned, we're in a bad place. So the goal here is to find the least bad path forward:
The community.  This is the bedrock on which all else stands.  But sometimes it moves too slowly.  And even worse, sometimes it gets a bug up it's collective butt and goes crazy.  Neither of those are good.
Jimmy.  Perhaps out of touch with daily events, but IMHO firmly in the right place on the big issues and has the best interest of this project at heart.  Still, the concept of BDFL is, as many have stated, out of place here.  And, as I see Valereee mentioned just above, has a bus number of 1.
WP:OMBUDS.  As noted by others, they seem to do a good job, but their remit is limited to a subset of what arbcom handles.  I don't follow their work perhaps as closely as I should, but my take is they have plenty of street cred, which is a critical factor when wading into any kind of dicey and contentious issue.  However right or policy-compliant you may be, if the community isn't willing to accept your judgement, you've lost before you even got started.
WMF, i.e. some combination of meta:Trust and Safety and the WMF board, and maybe other entities.  I don't explicitly distrust any of those, but I recognize that the WMF's priorities don't always jive with those of the enwiki community.  They very much don't have the aforementioned street cred; I suspect that if T&S ever tried to overturn an arbcom decision (no matter how bad a job arbcom did), the project would not survive.
So I don't know where this really leaves us.  I'm tempted to say Jimmy is the least bad of the alternatives, but not yet ready to put that down in the form of a vote.  -- RoySmith (talk) 14:27, 18 May 2023 (UTC)
My thinking was that Jimmy is the path of least resistance, given that any proposed replacement is going to involve a whole round of new discussions and rules which, for a process that is needed but barely used, is a waste of time. Since we are already over 100 support votes above though, it seems that this has to be the next step for those of us who think that arb decisions should have some oversight. Apart from your suggestions, there are other WMF-affiliated committees that could fit the bill, such as the newly-constituted Case Review Committee or indeed the U4C, if they ever manage to get that running. Or locally, there's the crats, who we already trust to not do a lot of important things. Or one could imagine a variant of the current set-up that addresses some of concerns above: making it not just Jimmy bit a triumvirate (or whatever) of project grandees, periodically rotating or holding elections for the position, etc. – Joe (talk) 14:42, 18 May 2023 (UTC)
Since when has it been normal to accept a majority vote and not read the consensus? I for one clearly see there isn't any consensus. Is this still going to pass? Nythar (💬-🍀) 16:15, 18 May 2023 (UTC)
At this point, one of the two criteria have been met, that at least 100 vote in favor. If at the close, those constitute a majority then it will pass. Wehwalt (talk) 16:19, 18 May 2023 (UTC)
Is there anything inscribed in policy that allows majority votes in certain cases? Nythar (💬-🍀) 16:22, 18 May 2023 (UTC)
@Nythar WP:ARBPOL#Ratification and amendment -- RoySmith (talk) 16:25, 18 May 2023 (UTC)
This comment is awfully telling about changing the process to change ARBPOL. The yes side has a 2-1 advantage at current count, which is a difference which has been mostly steady in the past 48 hours. Anywhere on wiki (but not RFB), that would be sufficient to say that is consensus usually, and in the unusual case the closer would get dragged to AN for a close review (even if he was right).
That said, if you want to discuss that, there is discussion on the talk page with a link to another drafting place about changing it. Izno (talk) 16:37, 18 May 2023 (UTC)
I'm just a bit surprised that consensus here is unnecessary. Normally, I'd have expected to see a closer leave a thorough analysis of the !votes, but for some reason this is simply a majority vote. Not sure how that's a good thing. Nythar (💬-🍀) 16:49, 18 May 2023 (UTC)
I don't think there are many people still around that participated in the initial development of WP:ARBPOL in 2004, I suspect the contemporary community would go with a different framework, but the only way to make that change is... wait for it... to go through this exact same process again. Beeblebrox (talk) 18:29, 18 May 2023 (UTC)
I've been poking through some old diffs related to this and found this comment from Jimbo after what appears to be the first attempt to use this process back in 2005: "The vote is solidly in favor of the proposal (80%+) even though only 70% was required.  The goal of 100 votes was overly ambitious, probably due to the relatively high voting threshold.  I'm not even sure whether or when or why a vote is necessary or valid or desirable for such things.  But, since 80%+ have voted for it, and since I support it, and since these amendments do more accurately reflect our practical operations, I ratify this vote as having been completed successfully, and declare this to be a proper amendment to policy, but I don't necessarily ratify that this is the way policy amendments should be decided in the future.  Maybe so, maybe not." Beeblebrox (talk) 18:45, 18 May 2023 (UTC)
Under the UK's unwritten constitution, the monarch still has the power of the Royal Assent. In theory the King could refuse his assent to any legislation or acts of government that require his signature, effectively a royal veto. In practical terms, the last monarch to exercise that power was  Queen Anne way back in 1708. But the authority remains and is mostly uncontroversial outside of hardcore republicans. It serves as an emergency brake in case of a constitutional crisis. No monarch would even think of using the authority absent an extreme crisis precisely because if one did not already exist, the use of the authority would certainly precipitate one and might well endanger the survival of the monarchy itself. I think it is a very good constitutional guardrail and I like the idea of something similar existing here, even if it is extremely unlikely to ever be needed. Some have asked about what should be done when the time comes where Jimbo either voluntarily surrenders his remaining rights or dies. That's a fair question, worth discussion. FWIW, I don't have a strong opinion on the matter. -Ad Orientem (talk) 13:51, 19 May 2023 (UTC)
It is a guardrail, but there are other guardrails available without having an unelected god-king whose actions over the years on en.wi have proven controversial and divisive. If ArbCom goes further off the rails than usual, the community can act just as its doing now. Pass a policy amendment to end the terms of all arbitrators, declare null and void all actions taken by them in the last 30 days and call new elections. It would be a truer test of whether ArbCom still has the confidence of the community than seeing who can galvanize one person into acting, possibly precipitously. (and Jimmy Wales does sometimes leap before he looks, we all know that, he just did it, after all.) Wehwalt (talk) 13:59, 19 May 2023 (UTC)
Re:"No monarch would even think of using the authority absent an extreme crisis precisely because if one did not already exist, the use of the authority would certainly precipitate one and might well endanger the survival of the monarchy itself. I think it is a very good constitutional guardrail". No, it isn't a constitutional guardrail, not even remotely. Royal Assent would never be withheld, period. And if any monarch tried it, the government would change the law to abolish it. It's of no more relevance than those old laws allowing freemen to drive their sheep over London Bridge (or whatever it is). And I suspect the law is only still on the books because American tourists think it's quaint ;-) Boing! said Zebedee (talk) 14:01, 19 May 2023 (UTC)
I doubt 1 in 100 Americans have ever heard of it. -Ad Orientem (talk) 14:03, 19 May 2023 (UTC)
That bit wasn't serious ;-) Boing! said Zebedee (talk) 14:04, 19 May 2023 (UTC)
Royal Assent would never be withheld, period. And if any monarch tried it, the government would change the law to abolish it. As in King Charles III (play). - Donald Albury 14:16, 19 May 2023 (UTC)
It's really not appropriate to compare Royal Assent here, firstly because, at least in the case of the British monarch, the powers cascade through multiple representatives (governors and governors-general) across the Commonwealth.  Second, despite claims above, Royal Assent has been withheld subsequent to the early 18th Century, some examples: Victoria, Australia, "The power of royal assent was used to prevent thirteen pieces of legislation from 1856 to 1910." New Zealand, 1981 in St. Kitts. Regards, Goldsztajn (talk) 03:35, 20 May 2023 (UTC)
The fact that 'royal assent' is being referred to here as if it provides any meaningful comparison; quite hilariously illustrates just how Anglophilic English Wikipedia unfortunately is Jack4576 (talk) 15:07, 20 May 2023 (UTC)
I was just thinking that. It's really odd and somewhat amusing how cultural differences are on full display in this ARBPPA. ⛵ WaltClipper -(talk) 15:13, 20 May 2023 (UTC)
Oh yeah, forgetting that a lot of people simply do not live in a monarchy and find the entire process of royal assent just as ridiculous. Chaotic Enby (talk) 23:38, 21 May 2023 (UTC)
I think a supra-majority should be needed for changes to policies. I hold that a simple majority is not enough to make the change. Debresser (talk) 17:24, 20 May 2023 (UTC)
And that stance isn't influenced by the fact that you voted No and No isn't winning? SilverserenC 17:28, 20 May 2023 (UTC)
Whether that is or is not Debreser's motivation, it is a perfectly legitimate position to hold. What I don't think is legitimate is your assumption of bad faith. Thryduulf (talk) 18:00, 20 May 2023 (UTC)
I asked a question to them about their stance, especially when they made it just after voting above. How is asking that question in relation to their immediately prior action assuming bad faith? And the majority result of how this all works was noted and discussed before this poll was even started, back when it was just in the 100 votes to even start this phase. And ARBPOL is quite clear on how this works, we're arguably even violating it by not already concluding once one side reached 100, but it does make sense to run the full 30 days before closing. Funny enough, if one wants to amend the policy to change how this system works, one would need to use this system to vote on the changes. SilverserenC 20:21, 20 May 2023 (UTC)
You may have intended your comment to be read as a genuine question, but because you phrased it as a statement presuming that their stance was influenced by their being in favour of the option that "isn't winning" that is not how it reads. Also, ARBPOL is not clear on how this all works - it is very clear that proposals must receive 100 votes in support to pass, but nothing else is - as evidenced by the multiple questions and discussions about how long it should be open, what level of support is required, etc. Thryduulf (talk) 20:54, 20 May 2023 (UTC)
Claiming someone's position stems from not liking a particular outcome, is quintessentially an accusation of bad faith
Jack4576 (talk) 03:47, 21 May 2023 (UTC)
Silver didn't claim anything, they asked a question. ⛵ WaltClipper -(talk) 14:46, 21 May 2023 (UTC)
it was a premise to their question ...... Jack4576 (talk) 02:02, 22 May 2023 (UTC)
What is the process by which one would amend WP:ARBPOL so that referendums of this magnitude would require a super-majority? And I guess we're talking something along the lines of 75% support? ⛵ WaltClipper -(talk) 14:47, 21 May 2023 (UTC)
See the final topic on the talk page for discussion and links. Wehwalt (talk) 15:13, 21 May 2023 (UTC)
If this amendment proposal doesn't pass, and if Jimbo Wales dies years later, what would happen to the rule allowing Wales overturning any ArbCom decision? (hopefully, doesn't look too morbid, does it?) George Ho (talk) 21:16, 21 May 2023 (UTC)
I'd assume the process for appealing to Jimbo would simply be dissolved in its entirety, and we'd just continue to putter along without that safety valve. This is assuming Jimbo does not try to put forth a proposal to designate a successor. ⛵ WaltClipper -(talk) 22:50, 21 May 2023 (UTC)


=== Checks and balances are important ===
Checks and balances are important to limit power.  ArbCom has previously pushed the scope of its authority. What if they go mad, and do it again, but worse?  Who has the standing to say “Hold on, you’ve gone too far, take it back to the community?”.  Moving forwards, the answer may not be Jimbo, but let’s make sure there is an answer, and that it doesn’t default to an anonymous WMF account.
Infrequency of the need to exercise checks on power is not a reason to abandon checks and balances. —SmokeyJoe (talk) 04:50, 22 May 2023 (UTC)

This reasoning is the entire reason I support the proposal. ArbCom is not a monolith, it's a group of individuals, and those arbitrators frequently disagree and tone down or completely shut down proposals from other arbitrators that go too far. In this, ArbCom is a check against ArbCom. It perhaps shouldn't be the final check, but a lone person should not have the ability to singularly modify ArbCom decisions unchecked. That's too much authority vested in a single person, a person who is prone to mistakes (as we all are), and who is the "final word" with no check or balance in place against their own actions in kind. Arbitrators being able to check against their fellow arbitrators is more than the current wording enjoys in regards to the lack of a check or balance against this lone individual should they amend a decision single-handedly. Quis custodiet ipsos custodes? Discussion of a new check and balance for ArbCom might be warranted but for now the outright removal of this unchecked authority is an improvement. - Aoidh (talk) 05:41, 22 May 2023 (UTC)
I'd say the petition and referendum is at least something of a check. The community can add in an overturning if needed. Adam Cuerden (talk)Has about 8.4% of all FPs. 05:56, 22 May 2023 (UTC)
I agree that “Remedies may be appealed to, and amended by” is too broad.  I’d replace it with an RfC mechanism. SmokeyJoe (talk) 09:24, 22 May 2023 (UTC)
Indeed. and it ought be mentioned; a large power of a check is not its exercise, but the fear of its exercise
The existing rule ensures that ArbCom maintains perspective and does not get carried away Jack4576 (talk) 07:52, 22 May 2023 (UTC)
I don't think a single one of the current members thinks about Jimbo when making their decisions. Every single one of us thinks about how the community will react. Izno (talk) 16:44, 22 May 2023 (UTC)
+1 Barkeep49 (talk) 17:04, 22 May 2023 (UTC)
@SmokeyJoe and Jack4576: I've made a rough proposal at User:Barkeep49/ARBPOL_amendment_sandbox. Probably easiest to have overturning an Arbcom proposal be similar to changing the rules around Arbcom. It shouldn't be an easy step. Adam Cuerden (talk)Has about 8.4% of all FPs. 16:45, 22 May 2023 (UTC)
The best check on power would be a democratic recall mechanism for both the existing committee and decisions it makes. Appointing a separate individual or body doesn't increase the community's control of the process, it just adds more layers of pointless complexity and hands arbitrary power to the nth empowered individual instead of n-1th. The separation of powers was an important development in the transition from monarchy to republicanism in the English-speaking world, but it is not an improvement over more direct democratic measures that are easily at our disposal on Wikipedia.  signed, Rosguill talk 17:37, 22 May 2023 (UTC)
If we're talking hypotheticals, one would be more wary of a rogue Jimbo than a rogue ArbCom. At least we can elect a new ArbCom, while electing a new Jimbo is impossible. 〜 Festucalex • talk 21:28, 22 May 2023 (UTC)
I don't think the fear is a rogue Jimbo, just a Jimbo self-deceived through his distance from the community, doing the wrong thing in the utter conviction that he is doing right. There was a time, admittedly before I was involved in Wikipedia, when Jimbo indeed had his finger on the pulse of things. But since then, he has grown more distant and shown a tendency to act before he really knows what is going on, witness his block of Bishonen some years ago, his actions regarding Bradv more recently.
I haven't always been the biggest fan of ArbCom but I'd rather put my faith in a group of people selected by us (and, if necessary, removed by us) who are much closer to the center of things than Jimbo is today. The people cited by the opposers, the kings, or governors-general or other people who can step in and make right when the lawmakers go wrong, they spend their time being in touch with the nations that are their charge. That isn't Jimbo anymore. Jimbo isn't here. He can't give the job of appeals court to ArbCom the attention it deserves. He's got other fish to fry. Having an appeal available to Jimbo isn't a good thing to have, because he isn't going to be able to do things better than ArbCom has. Recourse can be found, not in Jimbo, but in the community, which can pass an amendment like this to terminate the terms of the Arbs and elect new ones pledged to put whatever went wrong right. That's why I think the opposers who are saying they can't support because nothing is replacing Jimbo are wrong. The community is already there. Wehwalt (talk) 22:06, 22 May 2023 (UTC)
People always forget about the most effective"check and balance" to Arbcom decisions. There have been several occasions where the community has just said "yeah, yeah", and totally ignored an Arbcom ruling. (This is particularly true of any "recommendations" for reviewing content or reconsidering policies and/or guidelines.) It's more often than not that events completely outside of the ambit of Arbcom are those that result in changes in project philosophy and process. (BLPs were not a big deal until someone accused an article subject of having something to do with the assassination of a former US president. Classroom work only became a big deal when it became actively disruptive. The community changed the rules to allow any admin to indefinitely block accounts, a preserve that was once Jimbo's alone, and then was delegated to Arbcom.) Arbcom has a near-zero effect on the day-to-day operations of the project, and its major impact is in topic areas where conflict is rife in the real world, not just on Wikipedia. I say this, not only as a longtime community member, but as someone who wore the Arb hat for five years. Let's keep things in perspective. Jimbo hasn't had the level of community involvement to justify his continued "court of appeal" position for the better part of a decade. Arbcom doesn't have the level of influence on the project that Jimbo had prior to around 2010. That's because the project and the community have matured, and doesn't need a parental figure to make decisions for it. Risker (talk) 01:35, 23 May 2023 (UTC)