The 2025 The Hague summit is an upcoming meeting of the heads of state and heads of government of the thirty-two members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), their partner countries, and the European Union, which will be held in The Hague, Netherlands, on 24–25 June 2025. This will be the first NATO summit led by Mark Rutte, new NATO Secretary General and former prime minister of the Netherlands. The key topics under discussion at this summit include strengthening NATO’s deterrence and defence capabilities, increasing defence spending and building up the defence industry, and maintaining support for Ukraine.


== Background ==
It was decided at the 2023 Vilnius NATO summit that the Netherlands would host the 2025 summit. This will mark the first instance that a NATO summit will take place in the country. The exact date and location, the World Forum in The Hague, were announced by outgoing NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg in May 2024. The last major diplomatic conference held in The Hague was the 2014 Nuclear Security Summit, and the city was chosen over Rotterdam, Apeldoorn, and Maastricht.


== Summit Agenda ==

In preparation for the upcoming summit, several countries have already reported on what they believe will be discussed by delegates. According to Al Jazeera, the United Kingdom, France, Germany and the Nordic countries hope to formulate a multi-year plan to manage funding cuts in the event that the U.S. pulls out of NATO. Under this plan, European nations would contribute more funding to the organization because the US contributes 15% of the defense budget as of 2025. According to a report from Al Jazeera, NATO will propose a plan to require Europe and Canada to “boost its weapons and equipment stockpiles by 30 percent.” This will be done amid current uncertainty regarding the US ongoing role in NATO contribution.
The NATO summit will also discuss increasing members' yearly fiscal contributions for defense spending. Ahead of the summit, three Baltic defense ministers discussed the need for increased contributions to NATO. During these discussions, Estonian Minister of Defense Hanno Pevkur stated:  “The Baltic countries have already raised their spending, and now we [NATO] must work together to make this understanding clearer among all allies".
Within these discussions for defense contributions, NATO will also consider a target percentage of GDP for defense spending allocation. Recently, the United States has expressed its goal of making each NATO member state contribute at least 5 percent of its GDP to defense budgets. As of February 13, 2025, Poland has responded to this request ahead of the Hague summit by pushing its defense spending to 4.7 percent of GDP. Similarly, as of June 13, 2025, the Dutch caretaker cabinet has decided to increase the defence budget to 3.5% of the gross domestic product. In addition, they intend to spend 1.5% of GDP on matters that benefit defence, with which the Netherlands aims to meet the 5% requirement. In his first speech as the new NATO Secretary-General, Mark Rutte stated that the organization should “shift to a wartime mindset and turbo charge our defense production and defense spending”.
NATO will also discuss the recent Russo-Ukrainian War. The summit will address continued financial support and resource contribution to Ukraine as well as potential plans for additional support. Moreover, Ukraine has repeatedly tried to join NATO as an official member over the past few decades. Because of these repeated attempts, Ukraine’s potential membership will be discussed at the upcoming summit.


== Local event impacts ==
Johan de Wittlaan, along which the World Forum is located, would be closed off for four months. Due to capacity issues, temporary structures were erected on the street, for which trees and traffic lights were removed. The exterior of the World Forum was repainted, and the seats and lighting in the main auditorium were replaced.
It was estimated by Minister of Foreign Affairs Hanke Bruins Slot that the event would attract 8,500 attendants, of whom 6,000 delegation members, and would cost €95 million. Most of that amount would be covered by the national government, with €1.25 million to be paid by the municipality of The Hague.  
The Dutch National Police announced plans to deploy 27,000 personnel – nearly half its total workforce – for what would be the largest security operation in its history. Resources would be concentrated around The Hague, Amsterdam Airport Schiphol, and the connecting route. The police discouraged organizing other events in the Netherlands during the first half of 2025, with the Veenendaal-Veenendaal cycling race cancelled as a result – however the Amstel Gold Race (the biggest Dutch road cycling race) will take place following negotiations between the police and the Royal Dutch Cycling Union. Other events cancelled owing to the summit include the Veterans' Day parade.


== Participants ==


=== Invited non-NATO members ===


== References ==