The Armed Forces of the Republic of Croatia (Croatian: Oružane snage Republike Hrvatske – OSRH) are the national military forces of Croatia. The Croatian military consists of three service branches: the Croatian Army, the Croatian Navy and the Croatian Air Force. The OSRH is headed by the President of Croatia as commander-in-chief while defense policy is overseen by the Government of Croatia. The Croatian military advances multilateral security initiatives among international allies.  
Since the Croatian War of Independence (1991-95), the Armed Forces have played a key role in protecting territorial integrity and defending sovereignty. In the post-war early 2000s, Croatia moderated defense spending to accommodate nation-building; it later expanded military operations early 2010s. The military's first foreign deployment was to the War in Afghanistan, in 2003, later joining the military alliance NATO in 2009. The Croatian military maintains a close security and foreign intelligence relationship with NATO and with the United States. Its geopolitical influence in Southeast Europe has led to Croatia's deployment to various United Nations (UN) and NATO-led peacekeeping missions. Upon its ascension into the European Union (EU) in 2013, the military became a part of the defense forces of the EU. 
The Croatian military has significantly expanded domain and public funding since the early 2020s due to regional geopolitical risk. Its deep integration within Europe and the U.S. has led to modernization efforts through a robust defense industrial base. The Croatian military is among the most technologically-advanced in Southeast Europe. Croatia used military conscription during the 1990s with conscription expected to return in 2025. The Armed Forces are spread across continental Croatia and capital city Zagreb, with the Navy largely based in Split.  


== History ==


=== Formation in the early 1990s ===
In the late spring of 1991, the first military units of the National Guard Corps were formed, established on 20 April 1991. by the decision of the President of the Republic and which, for legal and political reasons, was formally part of the Ministry of the Interior. In addition to the structures and units that were created by state policy, there were also paramilitaries. The Croatian Party of Rights organized its armed detachments, the Croatian defense Forces (HOS), which were privately armed, relatively well trained and trained at the tactical level, and deployed to critical positions on the battlefields. The Party of Democratic Change (Reformed Communists, SDP) armed its activists in Istria, the Littoral and Dalmatia, as did the ruling Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) in other parts of Croatia. In some places, the TO system was reactivated (e.g. in Zagreb), which gave better results.
The system of command and control was initially critically confused, and the competencies were vague and unclear. The ZNG was thus under the dual jurisdiction of the Ministry of the Interior and the Ministry of Defense. A large part of the command in the field was transferred to local crisis staffs composed and led by political officials who did not necessarily have military knowledge broader than those they had acquired during their conscription service in the JNA. There were often several different units in the field, which, even if they were nominally in the same organization, often did not have a common higher command.
The main tasks of the ZNG (later HV) were to prevent the penetration of the JNA and other forces in the most important directions, to defend cities and critical areas, and to conquer JNA barracks in the depth of their own deployment. These tasks began to be fulfilled more comprehensively and systematically only after the armed forces were organized into a single Croatian Army (HV) on the basis of the new defense Law, and when the General Staff was established on 21 September 1991, with Chief General Anton Tus as its Chief. At that time, a more systematic mobilization of reserve soldiers and the organization of units, commands and institutions began, as well as the planned use of forces.
On 1 October 1991, large military-territorial and combat commands (Operational Zones) were formed with headquarters in Osijek, Bjelovar, Zagreb, Karlovac, Rijeka and Split. Subordinate to them were operational groups that commanded certain directions and areas. The basic and at the same time the highest tactical units were infantry brigades (professional and reserve), and brigades and battalions of other branches were also formed. By the end of the year, 63 brigades had been formed and developed.


=== Croatian War of Independence ===

During the Homeland War, the armed forces gradually grew to about 300,000 members. Most of the units were filled from the reserve, i.e. from the personnel who acquired basic military knowledge during their compulsory military service in the Yugoslav People's Army. Thanks to the growing military experience, the quality of these units grew, and the organization of the entire system improved over time.
The training of new generations of 18-year-old young men who served in the Croatian Army continued, whereby army units during military service were generally not used for combat tasks (young men would mostly receive call-ups for combat units soon after completing their compulsory military service).

As the war progressed, through clandestine operations (the legal procurement of military equipment for the war-torn territory of the former Yugoslavia was prevented), significant amounts of military surpluses created after the collapse of the Warsaw Pact were purchased; in particular, the procurement of combat aircraft of Soviet origin was significant for the formation of the Croatian Air Force. The Croatian Air Force had included about twenty MiG 21 aircraft and several Mil Mi-24 combat helicopters, as well as several transport helicopters. The domestic industry has become capable of significant independent production of weapons and military equipment.The Croatian Navy was created to a large extent thanks to the successful action of capturing about one quarter of the Yugoslav Navy vessels in Šibenik in 1991. RBS-15 anti-ship missiles were also captured: this system made in Sweden has not yet been put into operation by the Yugoslav Navy, and the Croatian Navy succeeded in doing so after Croatian experts independently developed the "Phobos" fire control system; Namely, the Swedish manufacturer was not allowed to deliver that key part of the weapon system. With the introduction of modern missiles with a range of over 70 km into operational use, the Croatian Navy has largely prevented serious action by the enemy navy.
The Armed Forces of the Republic of Croatia were in a wartime activation until 12 March 1996, when they switched to peacetime by the decision of the President of Croatia.


=== 21st century ===

With the stabilization of the situation after the end of the war, several important waves of reforms followed. There was an increasingly visible trend of other transition countries, as well as NATO members, to put emphasis in the development of the armed forces on mobility, on multifunctionality and flexibility in the use of the armed forces, and not on the mass composition and heavy equipment. Economic over-demanding and conceptual inadequacy, i.e. the inapplicability of the old Cold War conception became obvious. New security threats and a new international constellation called for deeper changes in the way armed forces were designed. The process of reforming the defense system began in 2002. The aim of the reform and reorganization is to establish a modern structure of the defense system that will be able to respond to the challenges of the new era, taking into account the membership of the Republic of Croatia in NATO and security arrangements within the European Union. The main guidelines for the reform are set by strategic documents adopted by the Republic of Croatia: the National Security Strategy of the Republic of Croatia, the defense Strategy of the Republic of Croatia, the Military Strategy of the Republic of Croatia. During 2003, the Ministry of defense and the General Staff began working on the Strategic defense Review (SPO), which was adopted in 2005. With the adoption of the Long-Term Development Plan of the Croatian Armed Forces 2006 – 2015 (DPR) in the Croatian Parliament on 7 July 2006, clear content and time frames for further reform, development and modernization of the Croatian Armed Forces in the next ten years were set.

The essence of the changes consists in the gradual transition from Croatian individual (national) to collective defense and security mechanisms, and this also implies:

transition to the professionalization of the Croatian Armed Forces, which means replenishment of soldiers voluntarily, and not through conscription;
the transition to a collective defense system means a smaller active and reserve composition, but better trained, equipped, compatible and interoperable with allies.
the possibility that smaller nations that are members of the Alliance, such as Croatia, can partially "specialize" in order to be able to contribute to joint operations in a specific way with their limited capacities.
even greater overall engagement of units and members of the Croatian Armed Forces in collective activities, international missions, and preventive security activities
In 2007, the Decision was made not to call up recruits for military service which represented an important step towards the professionalization of the Croatian Armed Forces, which implies the abolition of compulsory military service and the introduction of voluntary military service. The first generation of volunteer conscripts began serving in November 2008.
The Croatian military significantly expanded during the early 2020s due to the regional Russian invasion of Ukraine in 2022. Croatia's deep integration within Europe and with the U.S. has led to modernization as well as joint procurement of advanced military assets. Croatia used military conscription during the 1990s with conscription expected to return in 2025. The Croatian military entered into a regional defense pact with Albania and Kosovo in 2025.  


== Defense expenditure ==

In the post-war early 2000s, Croatia moderated its military budget to accommodate nation-building; it later expanded military operations early 2010s. During the wartime 1990s defense represented a major stake in Croatian public spending due to then ongoing Croatian War of Independence. In 1995, the Croatian defense budget stood at 12.4 billion Croatian Kuna or around 10% of GDP, which represented their highest defense rate. Approximately €1.14 billion was paid in defense pensions to some 97,000 individuals in Croatia in 2024. Croatia brought its military budget to 2% of GDP in 2025. It intends to grow defense spending to 3% of GDP by 2030, commensurate with economic growth in Croatia. With modernization of the equipment of the Armed Forces, it is planned that 29% of the total amount will be spent on acquiring new NATO standard equipment in 2025, above the 20% that NATO charter obliges its member state to spend.
The defense expenditures of Croatia, summarizing for the following years:


== Structure ==
The Armed Forces are divided into branches, services, professions and their specialties. The President is the Commander-in-Chief and exercises administrative powers in times of war by giving orders to the Chief of Staff, while administration and defense policy execution in peacetime is carried out by the Government through the Ministry of defense. This unified institution consists of land, sea, and air branches referred to as:
Croatian Army (Hrvatska Kopnena Vojska - HKoV)
Croatian Navy (Hrvatska Ratna Mornarica - HRM)
Croatian Air Force (Hrvatsko Ratno Zrakoplovstvo - HRZ)
Branches of the Armed Forces are parts of the Armed Forces within which the preparation and equipping of individuals, units and purpose-built forces are carried out for the execution of tasks in certain geographical areas (land, sea, air) whose primary task is to maintain the required level of combat readiness of operational units.
The armed forces have a peacetime and a wartime composition. The peacetime composition of the Armed Forces consists of active military personnel, civil servants and employees assigned to the Armed Forces, reservists called up for training, contract reservists, cadets and persons who have received voluntary military training. Exceptionally, the peacetime composition of the Armed Forces also consists of conscripts when compulsory military service is in force. The wartime composition of the Armed Forces, in addition to military personnel, civil servants, employees and conscripts (when compulsory military service is in force), also consists of conscripts mobilized into the Armed Forces.
The current structure of the Croatian Armed Forces has been in force since 1 December 2014 and consists of the General Staff of the Croatian Armed Forces, Croatian Army (HKoV), Croatian Navy (HRM), Croatian Air Force (HRZ), Croatian defense Academy (HVU), Support Command (ZZP), Special Forces Command (ZSS), Military Disciplinary Court (VSS), Military representations (VP) and Headquarter support units (PP).

General Staff of the Croatian Armed Forces is a joint body organized within the Ministry of defense which is responsible for the command, preparation and use of the Armed Forces. General Staff commands the entire Armed Forces in accordance with the dictate of the Commander-in-Chief (President of Croatia) and the Minister of Defense and performs other professional activities for the Commander-in-Chief and the Minister of Defense. It also has a number of units under its direct command, including the ZSS, Honour Guard Battalion and several others.
Commands of the branches of the Armed Forces are responsible for the functioning of the branches of the Armed Forces and are responsible for the preparation of subordinate commands and units for the execution of tasks. Branch commands participate in the professional development of personnel and are responsible for the training of active and reserve personnel.
Croatian Defense Academy (HVU), also known as the "Dr. Franjo Tuđman", is a higher educational military institution of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Croatia. It is responsible for the training of individuals for the needs of the entire Croatian Armed Forces. It is located in the "Petar Zrinski" barracks in the Zagreb district of Črnomerec.
Support Command (ZZP) is the most important part of the logistics system of the Croatian Armed Forces and is responsible for the implementation of logistical, medical and part of personnel support for the Croatian Armed Forces. It's responsible for the acquisition and preparation of all State resources allocated to the Armed Forces and for the overall plan of their use and its applicability to operations on the battlefield.
Croatian Special Forces Command (ZSS) is one of the three independent commands of the Croatian Armed Forces, subordinate directly to the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Croatia. CROSOFCOM mission is to ensure the combat readiness of the special operations forces for operations in defense of the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of the Republic of Croatia and to participate in NATO and coalition-led operations.
Military representations (VP) represent the Armed Forces and carry out their duties, professional tasks related to participation in the work and monitoring the work of departments, working groups, permanent and temporary bodies at the North Atlantic Alliance, European Union and at the Allied Command Operations and the Allied Command Transformation.
Staff support units (PP) are established for the purpose of developing capabilities for the implementation of various tasks and support activities, which other compositions, due to the specificity or scope, cannot be provided by the Armed Forces within its organic composition. Those units are: Intelligence Center (SOD), Military Police Regiment (PVP), Honor Guard Battalion (PZB), Center for Communication and Information Systems (SKIS), Personnel Management Center (ZUO) and Home of the General Staff of the Armed Forces (DGSOS)


== Military assets ==

The Croatian Armed Forces maintains a robust defense industrial base due to its close partnership with the European Union and the United States. The Croatian military is among the most technologically-advanced in Southeast Europe. Reports have listed some of the following military assets: 650 AFVs, around 150 pieces of artillery, 105 MLRSs, 75 tanks, and 25 SPGs. The Air Force has 12 Dassault Rafale F3-R fighter jets, 8 UH-60 Black Hawk helicopters, d10 Mi-171 combat-transport helicopters and 15 OH-58 attack helicopters. The Navy has 30 ships, out of which five 60-80 metre fast attack craft are used in offensive capabilities. Following the 2022 Zagreb Tu-141 crash, the Croatian military promptly acquired surface-to-air missile (SAM) air defense systems MISTRAL and VL MICA.  
The military significantly expanded its drone warfare program through strategic procurements and domestic manufacturing of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) in 2024. It plans to produce 500,000 small drones annually as part of broader European rearmament. Croatian robotics company DOK-ING was contracted by German arms manufactor Rheinmetall to produce an advanced reconnaissance drone fleet for both countries. Later that year it purchased six armed Bayraktar TB2 drones from Turkey. In 2025, it purchased 50 Leopard 2A8 tanks from Germany and 89 military vehicles from the United States, including Black Hawk helicopters, multiple HIMARS rocket launchers (from Lockheed Martin), and an battalion-sized fleet of Bradley M2A2 tanks.  


== Personnel ==
In 2023, Armed Forces had 15,900 members, of which 14,103 were active military personnel and 1,806 civil servants. Total available male manpower aged 16–49 numbers 1,035,712, of which 771,323 are technically fit for military service. Croatia used military conscription during the 1990s with conscription expected to return in 2025.


== Command and control ==

The Commander-in-Chief of the Croatian Armed Forces is the President of the Republic of Croatia. Command of the Armed Forces in peacetime shall be exercised by the Commander-in-Chief through the Minister of defense, who shall be responsible to the Commander-in-Chief for the implementation of the order and shall report to him on the implementation. In a state of imminent threat and a state of war, the Commander-in-Chief directly issues orders to the Chief of the General Staff and at the same time informs the Minister of defense of the issued orders. In this case, the Chief of the General Staff shall be responsible to the Commander-in-Chief for the implementation of the order. If the Minister of defense fails to carry out the orders of the Commander-in-Chief, who may exercise command of the Armed Forces directly through the Chief of the General Staff.
Command and direction in the Armed Forces shall be carried out by officers and non-commissioned officers appointed and assigned to command duties in the Armed Forces. Command is based on the principles of single-leadership and subordination. Members of the Armed Forces shall be accountable to their superiors for their work, command and management. For the purpose of establishing a unified system of command and control over all parts of units in the country and abroad, a new organizational unit was established at the General Staff of the Croatian Armed Forces: the Command Operations Center (ZOS). A unique operational picture is created in the Command Operations Center and enables the conduct of all activities and operations of the Croatian Armed Forces units in the period of up to 96 hours, including the engagement of forces in the execution of tasks of surveillance of the air and sea space of the Republic of Croatia. The Croatian Parliament exercises democratic control over the Armed Forces.


== International cooperation ==


=== United States ===

Croatia and the United States are close military allies and share a robust bilateral defense industrial base. Their closeness has led to the U.S. housing regional intelligence agencies, such as the CIA and NSA, in Croatia. Both are members of NATO, leveraging Croatia's aerospace and defense manufacturing and U.S. military operations to advance multilateral initiatives. After the 2022 Tu-141 drone crash in Zagreb, the U.S. dispatched two F-16 fighter jets in a show of military strength for Croatia. U.S. interests in Croatia are centered on the state's stabilizing influence in the region and extending the global reach of jointly-held Western ideals. Both nations exchange military assets and foreign intelligence. The Croatian diaspora in the U.S. is estimated to be around 500,000 which, in part, informs the military policy of Croatia. The U.S. and Croatia work together within 11 separate military programs, funds and initiatives.


=== United Nations ===

The Croatian military began its first participation in the UN peacekeeping mission in 1999 by sending 10 members of the Croatian Armed Forces to the peacekeeping mission in Sierra Leone - UNAMSIL as peace observers. In addition to UN peacekeeping missions, in February 2003, with the participation of Military Police platoons in NATO's ISAF mission in Afghanistan, Croatia also began its engagement in NATO missions. In October 2008, for the first time, a reconnaissance team (15 members) has been deployed to the EU peacekeeping mission (EUFOR) in Chad and the Central African Republic for 6 months.


=== NATO ===

Croatian soldiers have been participating in the KFOR operation in Kosovo since July 2009 when the first HRVCON was sent with 20 members and two Mi-171Sh transport helicopters. The contingents consisted of an infantry company, an air component (located at the Bondsteel base), national support components (command group, intelligence support team, national support element and mobile medical team), a reconnaissance team. In addition, the Croatian Armed Forces also participate with the staff of KFOR HQ and advisors in the NALT team, who are located in the "Film City" camp, KFOR HQ in Pristina.

Croatia participates in NATO's Enhanced Forward Presence operation in Poland and Lithuania. The first Croatian contingent went to Poland in October 2017, the second in March 2018, and in October of the same year, the 3rd Croatian contingent (HRVCON eFPBG – USA) was deployed to the northeast of Poland to the military training ground "Bemowo Piskie" and took over the tasks of its predecessors. The 4th HRVCON is currently in Poland, together with members of the armed forces of Romania and Great Britain and are part of the Battle Group led by the United States of America, which is attached to the 15th Mechanized Brigade of the Republic of Poland. The backbone of the contingent consists of members of the Artillery and Missile Battalion of the Guards Mechanized Brigade with a battalion of self-propelled multiple rocket launchers Vulkan, staff working as part of the BGP Command, as well as the Military Police team and the national support element with associated weapons, equipment and vehicles.
In November 2017, the 1st Croatian Contingent of NATO's Enhanced Forward Presence went to Lithuania, where they participated in this NATO activity as part of the German-led Battle Group (1st HRVCON eFPBG-DEU). 181 members of the Croatian Armed Forces were sent for a period of seven months, and the majority of the forces were members of the mechanized company from the 1st Mechanized Battalion "Tigers" of the Guards Mechanized Brigade. The basic task and mission of the Croatian contingent was integration into the multinational battle group led by the Federal Republic of Germany, as well as the implementation of training in that composition, which, in addition to members of the Croatian Armed Forces, also includes members of the armed forces of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the Kingdom of Norway, the Kingdom of Belgium, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, the French Republic and the host country of the Republic of Lithuania.
As part of the further strengthening of the Allies' deterrence and defense posture and taking into account the deteriorating security situation in Eastern Europe following Russian aggression on Ukraine, NATO launched an enhanced vigilance activity in February 2022, which led to the establishment of battlegroups in Hungary, the Slovak Republic, Romania and the Republic of Bulgaria. In accordance with the Decision of the Croatian Parliament of March 2022. The Republic of Croatia has been participating in this battle group since July 2022, when the first Croatian contingent was sent to Hungary.
At the Warsaw Summit in July 2016, NATO announced the transformation of the Active Endeavour mission in the Mediterranean Sea into a broader maritime security operation. The new operation was named Sea Guardian. In September 2018, the Croatian Navy ship RTOP-41 Vukovar participated in the Sea Guardian peace support operation in the Mediterranean. The commander of the ship was Lieutenant Battalion Ante Uljević, and the commander of the 1st HRVCON was the captain of the corvette Nikola Bašić. It was the first time that a Croatian Navy ship participated in the NATO-led Operation Sea Guardian, where it carried out non-combat tasks with a focus on creating a comprehensive maritime situational picture, with the aim of deterring possible threats and ensuring common safety at sea.
Members of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Croatia have been participating in the UNIFIL (United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon) operation since July 2007 as staff officers, and since 2013 as liaison officers. In March 2023, officer of the Croatian Armed Forces was commended by the UNIFIL commander for his assistance in the evacuation of injured soldiers of the Israel Defense Forces due to the activation of a mine explosive device during March 2023.


== See also ==
Major non-NATO ally
Split Agreement: a 1995 defense pact with Bosnia and Herzegovina


== References ==