The College of Europe (French: Collège d'Europe; Dutch: Europacollege; Polish: Kolegium Europy) is a post-graduate institute of European studies with three campuses in Bruges, Belgium; Warsaw, Poland; and Tirana, Albania.
The College of Europe in Bruges was founded in 1949 as a result of the 1948 Congress of Europe in The Hague by leading historical European figures and founding fathers of the European Union, including Salvador de Madariaga, Winston Churchill, Paul-Henri Spaak and Alcide De Gasperi, to promote "a spirit of solidarity and mutual understanding between all the nations of Western Europe and to provide elite training to individuals who will uphold these values" and "to train an elite of young executives for Europe". After the fall of communism, the college opened an additional campus in Natolin, Poland, that was gifted to the institution by the Polish government in 1992. A campus in Tirana opened in 2024.
The College of Europe is historically linked to the establishment of the European Union and its predecessors, and to the creation of the European Movement International, of which the college is a supporting member. Federica Mogherini, former High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, was appointed as the Rector to start in September 2020; former President of the European Council Herman, Count Van Rompuy is chairman of the board.
The College of Europe was the most represented alma mater (university attended) among senior EU civil servants, based on a sample compiled by Politico in 2021. The Financial Times writes that "the elite College of Europe in Bruges" is "an institution geared to producing crop after crop of graduates with a lifelong enthusiasm for EU integration". while the BBC called it "the EU's very own Oxbridge". Each academic year is named after a patron and referred to as a promotion. The academic year is opened by a leading European politician. It has the status of Institution of Public Interest, operating according to Belgian law.


== History ==


=== Hague Congress initiative to create a College of Europe ===
The College of Europe was the world's first university institute of postgraduate studies and training in European affairs. It was founded in 1949 by leading European figures, such as Salvador de Madariaga, Winston Churchill, Paul-Henri Spaak and Alcide De Gasperi, in the wake of the Hague Congress of 1948, that led to the creation of the European Movement. At the Congress, the Spanish statesman Salvador de Madariaga strongly advocated for the creation of a College of Europe, where graduates from different European states could study together as a way to heal the wounds of the World War II. Although the cultural resolution adopted at the end of the Congress did not include explicit references to the establishment of a College of Europe and only advocated for the creation of a "European Cultural Centre and a European Institute for Childhood and Youth Questions", the idea of establishing a European University was put forward by Congress attendees immediately after the Congress.

A group of Bruges citizens led by the Reverend Karel Verleye succeeded in attracting the college to Bruges. Professor Hendrik Brugmans, one of the intellectual leaders of the European Movement and the President of the Union of European Federalists, became its first Rector (1950–1972). John Bowie, Professor of Modern History at Oxford University, was appointed director of the first session held by the college, in 1949. Henri van Effenterre, who was a Professor of Ancient History at Caen University and Alphonse de Vreese, International Law professor at the University of Ghent, also contributed to that first session. The topic of that first session taught to the first promotion of the college (frequently called préparatoire, for it is the only promotion not named after any prominent figure) was "Teaching history and the development of a European spirit in universities".
In the decades that followed the establishment of the institution, students were hosted at the Navarra Hotel in the historic centre of Bruges until 1981. 
The College consolidated itself as an institution specialized in studies focused on the newly established European Communities (the college was founded in 1949, before the communities were established).


=== Bruges speech by Margaret Thatcher ===

In 1988, British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher delivered a speech that became known as the Bruges speech at the College of Europe as part of the opening ceremony for that academic year. The Bruges speech is considered by observers as the cornerstone of the Eurosceptic movement that eventually led to Brexit. Thatcher laid down her vision for Europe, claiming that the European Community should remain an economic union, refusing the claims for a closer political integration made by Commission President Jacques Delors. Thatcher outlined her opposition to any attempts to create "a European superstate exercising a new dominance from Brussels." The speech was perceived as not only an attack on European federalism but an attack on the European project, as such.


=== Post-Cold War history ===
After the fall of communism and changes in Central and Eastern Europe, the College of Europe campus at Natolin (Warsaw, Poland), was founded in 1992 with the support of the European Commission and the Polish government. According to former President of the European Commission Jacques Delors, "this College of Europe at Natolin is more than the symbol of Europe found once again, it is the hope represented in this beautiful historic place. The hope that exchanges can multiply for greater mutual understanding and fraternity". The establishment of a second campus in eastern has been frequently regarded as part of an effort aiming to train young students from eastern countries under the auspices of eastern enlargement. Since the establishment of that second campus in Poland, the college operates as "one College – two campuses," and what was once referred to as the "esprit de Bruges", is now known as the "esprit du Collège".
In 2012, the College of Europe became a supporting member of the European Movement International. The academic year 2018–2019 marked the first time in which a promotion was named after a College alumnus, Manuel Marín, Spanish Statesman, EU Commissioner and acting President of the Commission (known as the "father of the Erasmus Programme"), who had passed away early that year. In 2015, three years before the election of Marín as Patron, former Finnish Prime Minister Alexander Stubb was the first College alumnus to be invited to be the Orateur at the opening ceremony of that academic year.
Former Spanish Minister and Cabinet Spokesperson Íñigo Méndez de Vigo, 9th Baron of Claret, served as chairman of the board from 2009 to 2019; in 2019 former Prime Minister of Belgium and President of the European Council Herman, Count Van Rompuy was appointed the new chairman of the board. In May 2020 Federica Mogherini, former High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and Vice-President of the European Commission, was appointed rector of the College, the first high ranking political figure from the European Commission to hold the post.


== Campuses ==


=== Bruges campus ===

The Bruges campus is situated in the centre of Bruges since its establishment in 1949. Bruges is located in the Flemish Region of Belgium, a Dutch-speaking area, although the college does not use Dutch as one of its working languages.
The college has a system of residences in the centre of Bruges and not far from the Dijver, where the main administrative and academic building and the library are situated. None of the residences lodges more than 60 students so that each residence in fact has its own small multinational and multicultural environment.
It consists of the following campus buildings:


==== Dijver ====
The Paul Henri Spaak Building (named after the Belgian socialist prime minister and pioneer of European integration, nicknamed "Mr. Europe"), popularly known as Dijver, is the College's main administrative building on the Bruges campus. It hosts the college's main reception, some of its offices, classrooms and the library. It is located on the Dijver Canal. A white classic façade stands at the front of the main building (where the European, Belgian, Flemish and Brugeois flags hang together), while there is a garden in its back side. The garden is used by the students, who frequently spare their break time there due to its proximity to the library (which is connected to the main building by a corridor). Signed portraits of all the orateurs hang in the walls of the main corridor of the building.

The library building was built in 1965. Princess Beatrix of the Netherlands (later Queen Beatrix) laid the first stone of the library in a special commemorative event. Almost three decades after its completion, the library was reformed and enlarged (the works were completed in 1992). Most of the library funds are devoted to European Studies, together with law, economics, and political and administrative sciences. Access to the library is restricted to College students and academic staff. A bust of Salvador de Madariaga presides over the library main reading hall.


==== Verversdijk ====
Following the increase in the number of students attending the College each year, the College of Europe (with the support of different entities and institutions, including the Flemish Government and the City of Bruges) reformed the 17th century protected monument of Verversdijk to provide additional lecture theatres (auditoria), teaching rooms and offices for academics, research fellows and staff; and to extend its activities. The reform was led by the office of Xaveer De Geyter Architects (XDGA), and the project was nominated for the Mies van de Rohe award in 2009. The Verversdijk premises began to be used by College students in 2007. Besides its academic and administrative use throughout the course, a cocktail is served in its garden to each promotion, following their graduation ceremony at St. Walburga Church (Bruges).
The historical site of Verversdijk owes its name to fact that the owners of the houses standing there at medieval times were dyers who used wool traded with Scotland, as the area was populated by several Englishmen during the Middle Ages. During the Spanish rule, it hosted the schooling houses and the monastery established by the Jesuits in the 17th century. In 1792, the monastery auditorium was used as a meeting place by the Jacobin Club. The main monastery wing (dating back to 1701, and whose façade was plastered in 1865) was built along the canal, and was used as an athenaeum since 1851. its long inner corridor is an outstanding example of the rococo style in Bruges, whereas, the ashlar staircase is also an element of artistic relevance. The attic of the building, with a total length of 45 meters and a surprisingly well-preserved oak canopy, is currently used as a study room. During the First World War occupation of Belgium, the attic was used as a sleeping room for soldiers of the German Marine.
The monastery wing was also home to the Museum of Modern Painting from 1898 to 1931 (when they were transferred to the newly established Groeninge Museum). Since 2008, following and agreement between the College and the Groeninge Museum, the college hosts the 'Extraordinary Groeninghe Art Collection', an installation of contemporary works of art featuring international artists at Verversdijk's hallways. Members of the Groeninghe Art Collection meet every two months at the College to discuss art, attend lectures by art experts and consider possible purchases.
In March 2014, the so-called China Library was established at the Verversdijk compound. A project sponsored by the Information Office of the State Council of the Chinese Government, the library (decorated in Chinese style) is home to ten thousand books and documents in more than six languages, as frequently hosts events related with Sino-European relations or the Chinese culture.

		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		


==== Garenmarkt ====
The Hotel Portinari in Garenmarkt 15 with its classical façade was formerly home to Tommaso Portinari, the administrator of the Florentine "Loggia de Medici" in the 15th century in Bruges. It contains eleven apartments for professors and forty student rooms, two "salons" in 19th-century style, the "salon du Recteur" with 18th-century wall paintings and a modern "Mensa" for students. A room dedicated to Winston Churchill (who was among the voices calling for the establishment of the College during The Hague Congress in 1948 and was one of its founders the year after) was inaugurated by his grandson, Sir Nicholas Soames, and the British ambassador in 2017. Garenmarkt also hosts the canteen for all College students.


==== Biskajer ====
The residence is located in a home built in classicist style during the 19th century. The building is located in Biskajersplein, a small square named after the Spanish region of Biscay (the square is located on the side the dock where ships coming in from that region unloaded their merchandise in the 15th and 16th centuries). The actual residence is located on the lot occupied by the Mareminne house, which hosted the consulate of Biscay in the past, although the original building was demolished. Traces of the old consulate building can be found in the inner garden of the residence, which kept the shape of the consulate's horse stable. The residence hosts 53 students every year.


==== Gouden Hand ====
The Gouden Hand residence is housed in a Bruges-style building dating back to the 17th century. It is a listed monument. It was renovated during the 2005–2006 academic year. The name of the residence, directly translates from Dutch to "Golden Hand", after a medieval legend about the canal bordering the residence. Gouden Hand is also the name of two streets along the same canal. The 15th century painter Jan Van Eyck lived and owned a studio in the Gouden-Handstraat nr. 6, behind the current residence.
The Gouden Hand student bar is situated in the cellar. The building has been a backdrop for many films and documentaries.


=== Natolin campus ===

The Natolin Warsaw campus of the college was established in 1992 responding to the revolutions of 1989 and ahead of Poland's accession negotiations with the EU.
The Natolin Campus is located in a historic palace, part of a 120-hectare park and nature reserve—formerly the Royal hunting palace of Natolin—situated in the southern part of Warsaw about 20 minutes by metro from the city centre. The Natolin European Centre Foundation takes care of the complex and has conducted restoration of the former Potocki palace, making it available for the college.
The old historical buildings, including the manor house, the stables and the coach house, were converted to the needs of modern times and new buildings were constructed in a style preserving the harmony of the palace and its outlying park.
In 2022, the Natolin campus of the College of Europe hosted one of the four European citizens’ panels, organised as part of the EU's Conference on the Future of Europe.


=== Tirana Campus ===
In 2023, the College announced the opening of a new campus in Tirana, the capital of Albania. The Tirana campus of the College of Europe welcomed its inaugural cohort during the 2024–2025 academic year, comprising 32 students from 21 countries. The student body primarily included individuals from the Western Balkans and the European Union. The College has indicated an expected increase in student enrollment in the future.


== Student life ==


=== Admissions ===
Application may be made to national selection committees or by direct application to the College of Europe for individuals from a country where no selection committee exists. As of 2014, there are 28 national selection committees. Regarding scholarships, the national selection committees can grant a scholarship; approximately 70% of students receive a scholarship from either national governments or other public and private institutions. For much of its history, the college only admitted a few students, the number has increased since the 1990s.


=== Education ===
The College of Europe is a bilingual institution, requiring students to be proficient in both English and French. It offers several one-year advanced master's programmes in various fields related to European studies. At the Bruges campus, students can choose from four specialized master's programmes: European Political and Governance Studies, European Law, European Economic Studies, and EU International Relations and Diplomacy Studies. The Natolin campus offers a single programme: European Interdisciplinary Studies. At the Tirana campus, students are offered a programme in European Transformation and Integration.
Additionally, in collaboration with the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts University, the College (Bruges campus) offers a joint Master in Transatlantic Affairs, in which students spend one year at each institution.


=== Traditions ===
The College of Europe has developed several traditions. Some are shared with the École nationale d'administration (ENA) in France: Both the College and ENA name their promotions after a historical figure, being in the College of Europe an outstanding European figure, which is called "patron". Besides the choice of a prominent historical figure to name each promotion, each academical year is traditionally inaugurated by a prominent European figure. Furthermore, each year, College of Europe students are named honorary citizens of Bruges prior to their departure. Moreover, since its early years, the College of Europe has incorporated national days and weeks as a core part of its traditions: During these events, students organize cultural activities, academic conferences, traditional meals, and social gatherings to showcase the distinctive aspects of their national heritage. Another tradition dating back to the first years of existence of the college is the visit to Flanders fields during the first weeks of the academic year. During that visit, students lay a floral tribute at the Menin Gate war memorial in Ypres.


== Promotions ==
Academic years at the College are known as promotions. Each promotion is named after an outstanding European, referred to as the promotion's patron.
The opening ceremony each year is presided over by a prominent politician, referred to as the Orateur; they have included Angela Merkel, David Miliband, Jean-Claude Juncker, Javier Solana, José Manuel Barroso, Valéry Giscard d'Estaing, Juan Carlos I of Spain, Margaret Thatcher and François Mitterrand. Being invited as the college's Orateur is considered a high honour.


== Notable alumni ==
Many former students of the college, referred to as anciens (French for alumni), have gone on to serve as government ministers, members of various parliaments, diplomats and high-ranking civil servants and executives.

		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		

A list of all alumni from 1949 to 1999 is included in the book The College of Europe. Fifty Years of Service to Europe (1999), edited by Dieter Mahncke, Léonce Bekemans and Robert Picht.
Alumni of note of the College of Europe (from 1949) include

Alumni of note of the College of Europe in Natolin, Poland (from 1993) include:
Gert Antsu, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of the Republic of Estonia to Ukraine
Jarosław Domański, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of the Republic of Poland to the Islamic Republic of Iran
Marija Pejčinović Burić, Deputy Prime Minister of Croatia, Minister of Foreign and European Affairs
Alyn Smith, Scottish member of the European Parliament
Olesea Stamate, Minister of Justice of the Republic of Moldova
Rafał Trzaskowski, Mayor of Warsaw, former member of the Polish Sejm, former Polish member of the European Parliament, former Polish Minister of Administration and Digitization, former Secretary of State in the Polish Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Maciej Szpunar, First Advocate General at the Court of Justice of the European Union


== Faculty and organisation ==
The College of Europe originally had no permanent teaching staff; the courses were taught by prominent academics and sometimes government officials from around Europe. Especially in the last couple of decades, the college has increasingly employed professors and other teaching staff on a permanent basis.


=== Academics ===


=== Organisation ===


==== Rectors ====
The rector directs and coordinates the college's activities.

Hendrik Brugmans (1906–1997) (1949–1971)
Jerzy Łukaszewski (°1924) (1972–1990)
Werner Ungerer (°1927) (1990–1993)
Gabriel Fragnière (1934-2015) (1993–1995)
Otto von der Gablentz (1930–2007) (1996–2001)
Piet Akkermans (1942–2002) (2001–2002)
Robert Picht (1937–2008) (a.i. 2002–2003)
Paul Demaret (2003–2013)
Jörg Monar (2013–2020)
Federica Mogherini (2020–present)


==== Vice rectors ====
The vice rector is responsible for the day-to-day administration of the Natolin (Warsaw) campus.

Ettore Deodato (1993)
David W. P. Lewis (1994–1996)
Jacek Saryusz-Wolski (1996–1999)
Piotr Nowina-Konopka (1999–2004)
Robert Picht (a.i. 2004–2005)
Robert Picht (2005–2007)
Ewa Ośniecka-Tamecka (2007– present)


==== Presidents of the Administrative Council ====
Salvador de Madariaga (1950–1964)
Jean Rey (1964–1974)
François-Xavier Ortoli (1974–1975)
Daniel Coens (1985–1990)
Manuel Marín (1990–1995)
Jacques Delors (1995–2000)
Jean-Luc Dehaene (2000–2009)
Íñigo Méndez de Vigo (2009 – 2019)
Herman Van Rompuy (2019–present)


== Controversies ==


=== Controversy concerning Saudi Arabia ===
In February 2019, a series of press pieces published by EUobserver revealed that the Bruges-based institute was paid by the Saudi government to set up private meetings between Saudi ambassadors, EU officials, and MEPs. Although EU lobby transparency rules say that academic institutions should register if they "deal with EU activities and policies and are in touch with the EU institutions", the College of Europe is not listed in the EU joint-transparency register. On 13 February, MEP Alyn Smith of Greens/EFA wrote to ask Jörg Monar, Rector of the College of Europe, to provide assurances that the institute has not received "financial contributions from the Saudi authorities in any form" in its efforts to set up meetings with the EU institutions. On 20 February, Marietje Schaake of the ALDE group presented a written question to the European Commission on this issue. This written question was the subject of a response from the European Commission published on 17 May in which it explained not having any direct evidence as to the facts reported, nor being able to comment on the sources of revenue of the College of Europe beyond European subsidies. A group of College alumni collected signatures to demand the institution to stop organising private meetings between MEPs and the Saudi government.
In a letter to the President of the European Parliament's Budget Control Committee Ingeborg Gräßle, Jörg Monar, Rector of the College of Europe, confirmed the organization of trainings for Saudi officials and criticized the media for reporting them as lobbying. The rector indicated that these meetings had no lobbying dimension but sought to show to the Saudis the reasons why the Union defended certain values, privileging communication over isolation to defend European values.
Inside Arabia Online, an online publication, characterised the lobbying by Saudi Arabia as part of a concerted effort to reverse the Kingdom's inclusion on the EU's "blacklist", which intends to penalize countries failing to combat terrorism financing and money laundering.


=== Allegations of sexual harassment and misogyny ===
The French language weekly news magazine Le Vif/L'Express published an article on 21 February 2019 based on the testimony of former students from recent years. The article reported a culture of sexual harassment and misogyny at the College of Europe. Cases of sexual harassment and inappropriate behaviour were described in the magazine, including frotteurism, forced kisses and groping. Various students reported to Le Vif/L’Express that the administration observes a code of silence on this issue. Cases of inappropriate behaviours by the academic staff were also reported. Contacted by Le Vif/L’Express magazine, the administration replied that: "In some occasions in the past, some students have crossed the personal barriers of other students". On 5 March 2019, a former student of the College of Europe, published an opinion in Le Vif/L’Express magazine, stating that a culture of sexual harassment and misogyny existed at the College of Europe when she was studying there.


=== Jungle comments by Josep Borrell ===
In October 2022, EU's High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy Josep Borrell made controversial comments in a speech to the College of Europe's new European Diplomatic Academy in Bruges. In his speech Borrell designated Europe as “a garden” and he called most of the world a “jungle” that “could invade the garden”. Federica Mogherini, the rector of the College of Europe was hosting Josep Borrell, who succeeded her in the function of High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy of the EU did not express any disagreement.


=== Sexual Harassment Scandal ===
In 2024, Politico Europe published an article detailing longstanding accusations of sexual harassment by an unnamed professor at the university. The article details that accusations against the professor had been logged as long ago as 2012, but that he continued to be employed by the university.
The publication of that article led to the dismissal of the professor Olivier Costa, whose identity was revealed further by Politico after the end of the disciplinary procedure.


== See also ==

École nationale d'administration
Europa-Institut of Saarland University
European Academy of Sciences and Arts
European University Institute
List of College of Europe presidents
List of College of Europe rectors and vice-rectors
List of Jesuit sites


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Karel Verleye, De stichting van het Europacollege te Brugge, Stichting Ryckevelde, 1989.
Dieter Mahncke, Léonce Bekemans, Robert Picht, The College of Europe. Fifty Years of Service to Europe, College of Europe, Bruges, 1999. ISBN 9080498319. Includes a list of all graduates 1949–1999.
Paul Demaret, Inge Govaere, Dominik Hanf (eds), Dynamiques juridiques européennes. Edition revue et mise à jour de 30 ans d'études juridiques européennes au Collège d'Europe, Cahiers du Collège d'Europe, P. I. E. Peter Lang, Brussels, 2007.


== External links ==
 Media related to College of Europe at Wikimedia Commons
Official website
Politico – College of Europe section
Alumni Association – College of Europe
The Madariaga – College of Europe Foundation Archived 21 June 2014 at the Wayback Machine
Behind the Walls, article by a College alumnus – Europe&Me Magazine