The IWI Negev, also marketed as the Negev NG-5 is a dual-fed light machine gun chambered in 5.56×45mm NATO cartridge, developed by Israel Weapon Industries (IWI), formerly Israel Military Industries Ltd. (IMI).
In 2012, IWI introduced the Negev NG-7, a general-purpose machine gun variant chambered in 7.62×51mm NATO cartridge. The “NG” stands for “Next Generation”.
Both the Negev and Negev NG-7 variants are in service with the Israel Defense Forces (IDF).


== History ==
The Negev started development in 1985 by Israel Military Industries (now Israel Weapon Industries) to replace the then in service Galil ARM. The Negev entered service with the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) in 1997, after extensive testing conducted by the IDF Ordnance Corps. The Negev is named after the Negev Desert in southern Israel.


== Design details ==

The Negev is a gas-operated, air-cooled, open bolt, select-fire, light machine gun with a rotating bolt. The Negev uses a long-stroke gas piston system that runs under the barrel and is connected directly to the bolt carrier, the gas system comes with a three position gas regulator for use with different feed types and conditions. The design was made to be reliable, especially in adverse conditions.


=== Striker firing mechanism ===
The Negev is striker-fired, where the bolt carrier assembly acts as the striker, and fires from an open bolt position.


=== Gas regulator settings ===
The Negev's adjustable gas regulator has three settings:

setting "1" is used exclusively when feeding from a magazine (rate of fire in this mode is around 850–1,050 rounds per minute).
setting "2" is used in normal operating conditions when feeding from a belt (rate of fire in this mode is also around 850–1,050 rounds per minute).
setting "3" which is used under adverse operating conditions, such as in the presence of dust, dirt or heavy fouling (rate of fire in this mode is around 950–1,150 rounds per minute).
Early prototypes used a different 3-position gas adjustment system:

setting "1"—for normal operations.
setting "2"—for adverse environmental conditions.
setting "3"—isolates the gas system, and is used to launch rifle grenades with the use of a grenade-launching blank cartridge drawn from a special 12-round magazine from the IMI Galil.


=== Fire selector ===
The Negev has a three-position manual safety/fire selector switch on the left side of the pistol grip; the selector switch is marked with Hebrew markings ('א for automatic fire; 'ב for semi-automatic fire; and נצ for "safe") for Israeli military variants, and Latin Characters ('A' for automatic fire; 'R' for "repetition" for semi-automatic fire; and 'S' for safe) for export variants of the machine gun.


=== Barrel ===
The Negev has a quick-change chrome-lined cold hammer forged barrel. The barrel is fitted with a slotted flash suppressor and a folding ambidextrous carry handle, which is used to carry the machine gun and remove the barrel of the Negev.
During the Negev's initial development a barrel with a 1 in (25 mm) (1:12 in) rifling twist rate was also planned, adapted for the lightweight M193 cartridge. Additionally, a multifunction muzzle device was designed, used to launch rifle grenades.


=== Sights ===

The Negev's iron sights (closed-type) consist of a front post (adjustable for both windage and elevation) and a rear aperture sight with an elevation adjustment drum, with 300 to 1,000 m range settings in 100 m increments. The sight line radius is 440 millimeters (17.3 in). The Negev is equipped with tritium sights for night-time operations, the vials are embedded into the front and rear sights, with a night sight exposed on the rear aperture.
The Negev has its sight rail mounted to the frame of the gun, and not the feed top cover, which is detached when reloading. This allows it to stay zeroed for a longer period of time when mounting red-dot, reflex sights or other optics.
The classic Negev did not possess the modern standardized Picatinny rail, and instead came with a welded adapter for an optical sight. The newer NG-5 and NG-7 have a standard picatinny rail, and in Israel are usually fitted with an optical scope similar to the standard scopes of Israeli assault rifles.


=== Stock ===
The full size Negev and Negev SF was originally manufactured with a metal-tube, fixed-length, folding (right) stock. This classic tube skeleton stock was a modified stock from the Galil rifle. The design of the Negev's recoil springs and non-reciprocating handle, allow the Negev to fire with the skeleton stock folded; however during reload the bolt cannot be actuated with the stock folded.
The Negev NG-5 came fitted with an adjustable length folding stock, that folds to the opposite direction to allow complete operation of the gun with the stock folded, with cheek well adjustment, allowing for easier fitting.


=== Bipod ===
Every variant of the Negev can have a folding bipod, installed to the forward end of the handguard and folded under and becoming part of the handguard when stowed. The receiver also has slots and hooks used to secure the machine gun to vehicle mounting hardware, including helicopters.
The Negev SF 'Commando' variants also come with a 45 degree forward grip "assault handle", allowing controlled fire while not using the bipod. The assault grip and bipod can be installed together, however the bipod cannot be folded with the assault grip installed.
The classic Negev could be fitted with mounting hardware on the handguard to allow users to mount a laser pointer. Current Negev models come mounting positions for bipods and the "assault grip" as well as a number of picatinny rails, including on the handguard allowing users to mount other hardware, including: laser pointers or laser target and illumination devices.


=== Ammunition ===

The Negev is chambered in 5.56×45mm NATO, optimized for the SS109 cartridge. The Negev NG-7 and 7 ULMG variants are chambered in 7.62×51mm NATO.
The Negev feeds from an M27 disintegrating, open-link ammunition belt, carried in a 150-round fabric container that clips into the magazine well, or alternatively from a 35-round box magazine from the Galil assault rifle, or a 30-round STANAG magazine from the M16 rifle (with the use of an adapter). 200-round ammunition belt containers are also available. Belted ammunition is introduced into the feed tray port from the left side, while the magazine is inserted vertically into the magazine well at the base of the receiver.
The feed system, which loosely copies the Czechoslovakian Vz. 52 and the PK, uses a lever mounted on the left wall of the receiver and driven by a cam in the recoiling bolt carrier to turn a small feed pawl. The belt is pushed by the pawl only during the rearward movement of the bolt carrier.


== Variants ==


=== Negev NG-5 ===
The Negev (1997-2012) was released in 1997. It has a barrel length of 460 mm (18.1 in) and can be fired either in semi- or fully-automatic. The original Negev features a folding, fixed length skeleton stock.
The Negev SF (1997-2012), previously marketed as the Negev Commando is a compact variant of the original Negev. It features a shorter barrel length of 330 mm (13 in) and is primarily fitted with a side grip (Negev Assault Grip).
The Negev NG-5 (2012-present), also marketed as the IWI Negev is an updated variant of the Negev available with the original Galil-like stock, or an adjustable folding stock.
The Negev NG-5 SF (2012-present), also marketed as the IWI Negev SF is a compact variant of the updated Negev NG-5. It features a folding adjustable stock, with an adjustable cheek well.


=== Negev NG-7 ===

The Negev NG-7 is a variant of the Negev chambered in 7.62×51mm NATO cartridge. It has a barrel length of 508 mm (20 inches) and is select-fire. It is fed by a 100- or 125-round assault drum magazine containing disintegrating M13 NATO standard ammunition belts or NATO standard ammunition belts and has two gas regulator settings as the possibility for box magazine feeding was omitted. The IWI eLog weapon-embedded sensor module was added to collect and store data on the actual use of the machine guns for more efficient maintenance management and servicing by armourers.
The Negev NG-7 SF is a compact variant of the Negev NG-7. It uses a shorter barrel and is primarily fitted with a side grip (Negev assault grip). It has a barrel length of 420 mm (16.5 inches).
The Negev NG-7 SF 13 is similar to the Negev NG-7 SF but features a 330 mm (13 in) barrel length.


=== Negev 7 ULMG ===
The Negev 7 ULMG was released in 2023. It was designed using the concepts of the Next Generation Squad Automatic Rifle (NGSAR) program and feedback from the Israel Defense Forces (IDF), improving upon the original Negev NG-7's design. It features the same barrel length of 420 mm (16.5 in) with the Negev NG-7 SF, and is 1.4 kg (3.1 lb) lighter. Both the Negev 7 ULMG and the Negev ULMG SF can be converted to use the 6.5mm Creedmoor cartridge by changing barrels, while using the standard M13 disintegrating links.
The Negev 7 ULMG SF is a compact variant of the Negev 7 ULMG that features a 330 mm (13 in) barrel length.


=== Vietnam adoption ===
The STrL5.56 is a Vietnamese licensed-copy of the Negev NG-5, chambered in 5.56×45mm NATO cartridge and manufactured by Z111 Factory.
The STrL-7,62VN (Vietnamese: Súng Trung Liên - 7,62mm Việt Nam, lit. 'Medium Machine Gun - 7,62mm Viet Nam') is similar to the STrL5.56 but chambered in 7.62×39mm cartridge, and was revelead in late 2024. It features a fluted quick-change barrel and a weight of 7.4 kg (16 lb). It is compatible with both the AKM-, STV-, RPK-pattern magazines and RPD's 100-round non-disintegrating belt, while using a soft belt box instead of RPD's heavy metal drum container. It is likely to become the next standard-issued light machine gun for the Vietnam military, replacing the obsolete RPD machine guns.


=== AI-based Negev LMG ===
Om 10 June 2025, the Indian Army tested an artificial intelligence-enabled light machine gun (LMG) based on Negev LMG. The system was developed by Nagpur-based firm, BSS Material Ltd. The trial, which focused on functionality and accuracy, was conducted at an altitude of 14,000 ft (4,300 m). The system is capable to "autonomously identify and engage targets in challenging mountain environments" and features Thermal and optical sensor fusion for precision targeting, ballistic compensation for wind, range, and temperature variables and encrypted remote command compatibility.


== Users ==

 Azerbaijan
 Brazil: Used by Military Police of São Paulo State, Military Police of Amazonas State
 Cameroon: Used by Battalion d'intervention rapide
 Colombia
 Costa Rica
 Cyprus: Used by mechanised infantry, paratroopers and the Special Forces.
 Democratic Republic of Congo: Used by Presidential Guard units in 2010
 Equatorial Guinea
 Estonia
 Georgia Since May 2010, standard issue light machine gun of the GAF. Heavily used by Georgian units in Afghanistan.
 India: 5.56 variant serving as standard issue LMG for Special Forces from earlier. An order for 16,479 NG-7s was placed in March 2020 to replace all the INSAS Light Machine guns present with the Indian Army, which were subsequently delivered in February 2021.
 Israel: The Negev was adopted by the Israel Defense Forces in 1997 and the Negev NG-7 was adopted in 2012. During the Gaza war, Israeli infantry brigades started transitioning to the NG-7 model.
 Ivory Coast:
 Kenya: Kenya Defense Forces
 Mexico: Mexican Federal Police
 North Macedonia: Police Special Forces
 Paraguay: Paraguayan Army.
 Philippines: Philippine National Police - Maritime Group. Philippine Coast Guard
 Senegal: Used by special forces and commandos
 Tanzania: Used by Tanzanian Special Forces.
 Thailand: Purchased 1,000 machine guns in 2007, and another 550 in 2008.
 Vietnam: In service with Naval Infantry.
 Ukraine


== See also ==
Daewoo Precision Industries K3
FN Minimi
HK MG4
M249 light machine gun
List of machine guns
List of dual-feed firearms


== References ==


== External links ==

Israel Weapon Industries – Negev (Main Website)
Israeli Weapons Industries - Negev NG-7