This is an index of lists detailing military conflicts involving the United States, organized by time period. Although the United States has formally declared war only 5 times and these declarations cover a total of 11 separate instances against specific nations, there  are currently 133 military conflicts included in these lists, 5 of which are ongoing. 
Formal declarations of war include: the War of 1812 (United Kingdom), the Mexican–American War (Mexico), the Spanish-American War (Spain), World War I (Germany and Austria-Hungary) and World War II (Japan, Germany, Italy, Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania). 
Since World War II, the U.S. has engaged in numerous military operations authorized by Congress or initiated by the executive branch without formal declarations of war; notable examples include the Cold War (Korean War and Vietnam War) and War on terror (the War in Afghanistan and the Iraq War).
Five military engagements, encompassing four wars, all of which are interventions, currently involve the US: the Yemeni Civil War, the Somali Civil War, the Syrian Civil War, and the Gaza War.


== Lists ==


== Background and Criteria ==


=== Criteria for inclusion on these lists ===

Under Article I, Section 8 of the U.S. Constitution, Congress holds the exclusive power to declare war. The United States has only officially declared war 5 times in the War of 1812, the Mexican–American War, the Spanish–American War, WWI, and WWII. These declarations cover a total of 11 separate instances against specific nations. This would exclude the Vietnam, Korean, Afghanistan, the American Indian Wars, Banana Wars, Civil War, and Iraq war in addition to many other smaller conflicts out of these lists. To display a wider sense of the scope of U.S. involvement in "wars" this list focuses on any military conflicts involving the United States Military regardless of size.
There are several related articles that cover other forms of violence, such as Attacks on the United States, List of rebellions in the United States, List of massacres in the United States, and list of Family feuds in the United States. Another related page, List of conflicts in the United States,  covers any type of violent action in the U.S., ranging from isolated homicide, to wars that would meet the criteria for inclusion in this article series. These lists are useful, but are generally separate from the criteria to be focused on in these articles.
These lists do not focus on small-scale rebellions, single terror attacks, riots, assassinations, labor wars, state wars, feuds, range wars, or gang wars, as much as military conflicts involving the United States military (U.S Army, U.S. Navy, U.S. Marine Corps, U.S. Airforce, U.S. Coast Guard (when acting in a military capacity), U.S. Space Force, the United States Intelligence Agencies (when acting in a military capacity [for instance the Special Activities Center]), the United States Public Health Service Commissioned Corps, NOAA Commissioned Officer Corps, Merchant Marines, and U.S. private military companies (PMCs).
These lists may include operations against piracy, if it involves the United States military, but generally should cover a whole operation and not a single action or battle, unless that particular operation was wide, but only consisted of one major battle. For example, Operation Ocean Shield included several conflicts such as the Dai Hong Dan incident and the Maersk Alabama hijacking. Operation Ocean Shield can be included, because it is part of a wider conflict, but the Dai Hong Dan incident and the Maersk Alabama hijacking would not. Similarly, the Aegean Sea anti-piracy operations of the United States had several battles, but only one more thoroughly reported (Battle of Doro Passage). These operations would be included, but not the Battle of Doro Passage. An exception to the rule of single battles is if a conflict is a punitive action or hostage rescue mission and marks a single operation that only involved one battle such as the Battle of Ty-ho Bay.
List of Colonial American Wars from the 17th century and List of Colonial American Wars from the 18th century both serve as a historical prequel, in that it focuses on the colonies and territories that would later make up the United States. As such the criteria will be similar and different in several respects.


=== Examples for criteria that are not included ===

Assassinations or assassination attempts: Assassination of John F. Kennedy, or the Attempted assassination of Donald Trump in Pennsylvania.
Coup d'état attempts: The Business plot or the Newburgh Conspiracy.
Cyber Wars: A form of military conflicts that takes place in cyberspace with cyber weapons. The Operation Olympic Games or the Operation Ababil.
Feuds: The Hatfield's and McCoy feud or the Earp Vendetta Ride.
Filibuster Wars: The Texas Revolution, actions of the Ever Victorious Army, the William Walker Wars, or the Fenian raids.
Gang Wars: The Dead Rabbits riot, or the Castellammarese War.
Isolated terrorist attacks: The Black Tom Bombing or the Beirut barracks bombings.
Labor Wars: The Great Railroad Strike or the Coal Wars.
Peacekeeping Missions: The International Force East Timor, the Kosovo Force or the Multinational Force and Observers.
Range Wars: The Johnson County War or the Castaic Range War.
Rebellions: The Whiskey Rebellion or the Ruby Ridge Siege, as well as Slave rebellions.
Riots: The L.A. Riots or the Battle of Liberty Place.
State or local wars: The Toledo War or the Battle of Athens.
Trade Wars: China–United States trade war or United States trade war with Canada and Mexico.


== See also ==

List of notable deployments of U.S. military forces overseas
List of operations conducted by Delta Force
List of operations conducted by SEAL Team Six
Timeline of United States military operations
List of NATO operations
United States Armed Forces
List of American military installations
List of United States drone bases
Social history of soldiers and veterans in the United States
Uniformed services of the United States
United States military casualties of war
List of conflicts involving the Texas Military
List of conflicts in Hawaii
Terrorism in the United States
Timeline of terrorist attacks in the United States
Lists of wars
List of ongoing armed conflicts
List of American Indian Wars
Oyster Wars
Category:Military alliances involving the United States


== Notes ==


== References ==