A Bosniak republic, or Bosniak entity, was proposed during the Bosnian War when plans for the partition of Bosnia and Herzegovina were made.  It would either be established as one of three ethnic states in a loose confederation, or as an independent "Bosniak state" in the area controlled by the Bosnian Army, as unofficially proposed by some Bosniak leaders. Thus, the Bosniak-inhabited territories or Bosnian Army-controlled area (the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina) would become a Bosniak state, as Republika Srpska was for the Bosnian Serbs and Herzeg-Bosnia for the Bosnian Croats. The failed 1992 Serb–Croat Graz agreement would see a small Bosniak buffer state, pejoratively called "Alija's Pashaluk" on a map displayed during the discussions. The Owen-Stoltenberg plan (July 1993) would give Bosniaks 30% of territory, including ca. 65% of the Bosniak population (according to the 1991 census).The Dayton Agreement (November–December 1995) ended the war and created the federal republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), made up of two entities, the Bosniak and Croat-inhabited Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH), and the Serb-inhabited Republika Srpska (RS). As noted by international relations expert Niels van Willigen: "Whereas the Bosnian Croats and Bosnian Serbs could identify themselves with Croatia or Serbia respectively, the absence of a Bosniak state made the Bosniaks firmly committed to Bosnia as a single political entity."
Propaganda texts appeared in 1996, after the war, calling for a Bosniak state. Secular Bosniaks have warned that a partition is not an option.
Many Croat political organizations, including the Croatian National Assembly, call for the partition of the Federation to create a Croat federal unit; most proposals entail the remainder of the territory of the Federation becoming, either de facto or formally, a Bosniak entity. 

		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		


== See also ==
Zulfikarpašić–Karadžić agreement
Croat entity in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Partition of Bosnia and Herzegovina
Peace plans proposed before and during the Bosnian War
Proposed secession of Republika Srpska


== References ==


== Sources ==
Kostić, Roland (2007). Ambivalent Peace: External Peacebuilding Threatened Identity and Reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Ambivalent Peace. pp. 78–. ISBN 978-91-506-1950-8.
Trnka, Kasim (2000). Konstitutivnost naroda: povodom odluke Ustavnog suda Bosne i Hercegovine o konstitutivnosti Bošnjaka, Hrvata i Srba i na nivou entiteta. Vijeće Kongresa bošnjačkih intelektualaca. ISBN 978-9958-47-072-1.
Velikonja, Mitja (2003). Religious Separation and Political Intolerance in Bosnia-Herzegovina. Texas A&M University Press. pp. 278–. ISBN 978-1-60344-724-9.


== Further reading ==
Ajanović, M. (1995). [Manifesto of a Bosniak republic]. Tuzla.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link)