The State of Vietnam (Vietnamese: Quốc gia Việt Nam; chữ Hán: 國家越南; French: État du Viêt-Nam) was a state in Southeast Asia that existed from 1949 until 1955, first as an associated state of the French Union and later as an independent state (from 20 July 1954 to 26 October 1955). The state claimed authority over all of Vietnam during the First Indochina War, although large parts of its territory were controlled by the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. 
Established in 1949, the State of Vietnam was formed within the framework of the French Union as a compromise between Vietnamese nationalists and the French, in opposition to the communists. It gained international recognition in 1950 and aligned politically with the Western Bloc. Former emperor Bảo Đại became Chief of State. Following the 1954 Geneva Accords between the communist Viet Minh and the French, the State of Vietnam lost its remaining foothold in the northern half of the country, where most rural areas were already controlled by the Viet Minh. Ngô Đình Diệm was appointed prime minister the same year and—after having ousted Bảo Đại in 1955—became president of the Republic of Vietnam.


== History ==


=== Vietnam after the World War II ===

The 16th parallel was established by the Allies on August 2, 1945, following the Potsdam Conference, dividing the former French Indochina into two military zones: Chinese Nationalist forces occupied the North, and British forces the South, to disarm Japanese troops. The communist-led Viet Minh launched the August Revolution to seek control in Vietnam, and Ho Chi Minh declared the independence of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRV).
Beginning in August 1945, the Viet Minh sought to consolidate power by terrorizing and purging rival Vietnamese nationalist groups and Trotskyist activists. On September 23, the British supported a French coup de force that overthrew the DRV government in Saigon and attempted to reinstate French control over southern Indochina. In 1946, the Franco-Chinese and Ho–Sainteny Agreements enabled French forces to replace the Chinese north of the 16th parallel and facilitated a coexistence between the DRV and the French that strengthened the Viet Minh while undermining the nationalists. That summer, the Viet Minh colluded with French forces to eliminate nationalists, targeted for their ardent anti-colonialism.: 205–207 : 699–700 
With most of the nationalist partisans defeated, and negotiations broken down, tensions between the Viet Minh and French authorities erupted into full-scale war in December 1946, a conflict which became entwined with the Cold War. Surviving nationalist partisans and politico-religious groups rallied behind the exiled Bảo Đại to reopen negotiations with France in opposition to communist domination.
On June 5, 1948, the Halong Bay Agreements (Accords de la baie d’Along) allowed the foundation of a unified Vietnamese government replacing the governments of Tonkin (North Vietnam) and Annam (Middle Vietnam) associated to France within the French Union. The Associated States of Indochina then also included the neighboring Kingdom of Laos and Kingdom of Cambodia. Cochinchina (South Vietnam), however, had a different status, both as a colony and as an autonomous republic, and its reunification with the rest of Vietnam had to be approved by its local assembly, and then by the French National Assembly. During the transitional period, a Provisional Central Government of Vietnam was proclaimed: Nguyễn Văn Xuân, until then head of the Provisional Government of South Vietnam (as Cochinchina had been known since 1947), became its president, while Bảo Đại waited for a complete reunification to take office.


=== Associated State (1949–1954) ===

On May 20, 1949, the French National Assembly approved the reunification of Cochinchina with the rest of Vietnam. The decision took effect on June 4 and the State of Vietnam was officially proclaimed on July 2. From 1949 to 1954, after reunification with Cochinchina, the State of Vietnam had partial autonomy from France as an associated state within the French Union.
Bảo Đại fought against communist leader Hồ Chí Minh for legitimacy as the legitimate government of Vietnam through the struggle between the Vietnamese National Army and the Việt Minh during the First Indochina War.
The State of Vietnam (SVN) found support from the French Fourth Republic and the United States while Ho Chi Minh's DRV was backed by the People's Republic of China and the Soviet Union (since 1950). Roughly 60% of Vietnamese territory was under Viet Minh control in 1952. However, most urban areas with large populations remained under the control of the SVN. While the State of Vietnam aligned with the anticommunist Western Bloc, the French exploited it to extend their colonial presence and to bolster their standing within NATO.
The Matignon Treaty on 4 June 1954 is considered to have granted Vietnam independence from France.: 9  Earlier, a 'Third Force' had emerged, consisting of those who strongly opposed communism but were also firmly against the French, and was at times labeled as attentistes. Ngô Đình Diệm, a prominent attentiste figure who gained support for his ardent anti-colonial stance, was ultimately appointed by Bảo Đại to lead the Vietnamese government in June 1954. With the full support of Bảo Đại, Diệm committed himself to rapidly establishing a truly independent state, and formally withdrew the State of Vietnam from the French Union on July 20, 1954.


=== Partition (1954–55) ===

The Geneva Accords, signed between the French and the Viet Minh on 21 July 1954, ended the Indochina War by establishing a temporary division of Vietnam at the 17th parallel, with the DRV in the North and the State of Vietnam in the South, pending nationwide elections scheduled for July 1956. Communist forces entered Hanoi on 10 October 1954, replacing the French Union forces that were withdrawing South. During the transitional period of relocation, around 150,000 Viet Minh personnel moved North. Meanwhile, at least 500,000 Catholics, about 200,000 Buddhists, and tens of thousands from minority groups moved South, many via Operation Passage to Freedom.
The State of Vietnam and the United States were firmly opposed to the final settlement at Geneva and the partition of Vietnam.: 7–9  In July 1955, Prime Minister Ngo Dinh Diem announced in a broadcast that South Vietnam would not participate in the elections specified in the Geneva Accords, asserting that elections held under communist rule in North Vietnam would not be free. 


== Politics ==


=== Provisional Central Government of Vietnam (1948–49) ===
On May 27, 1948, Nguyễn Văn Xuân, then President of the Republic of Cochinchina, became President of the Provisional Central Government of Vietnam (Thủ tướng lâm thời) following the merging of the government of Cochin China and Vietnam in what is sometimes referred as "Pre-Vietnam".


=== State of Vietnam (1949–55) ===
On June 14, 1949, Bảo Đại was appointed Chief of State (Quốc trưởng) of the State of Vietnam; he was concurrently Prime Minister for a short while (Kiêm nhiệm Thủ tướng).
On October 26, 1955, the Republic of Vietnam was established and Ngô Đình Diệm became the first President of the Republic.


=== Leaders (1948–55) ===


=== 1955 referendum, Republic of Vietnam ===

In South Vietnam, a referendum was scheduled for 23 October 1955 to determine the future direction of the south, in which the people would choose Diệm or Bảo Đại as the leader of South Vietnam. During the election, Diệm's brother Ngô Đình Nhu and the Personalist Labor Revolutionary Party (commonly known as "Cần Lao Party") supplied Diệm's electoral base in organizing and supervising the elections, especially the propaganda campaign for destroying Bảo Đại's reputation. Supporters of Bảo Đại were not allowed to campaign, and were physically attacked by Nhu's workers. Official results showed 98.2 per cent of voters favoured Diệm, an implausibly high result that was condemned as fraudulent. The total number of votes far exceeded the number of registered voters by over 380,000, further evidence that the referendum was heavily rigged. For example, only 450,000 voters were registered in Saigon, but 605,025 were said to have voted for Diệm. On 26 October, Diệm proclaimed the Republic of Vietnam—widely known as South Vietnam—whose reformed army, with American assistance, pursued the conflict with North Vietnam; the Viet Cong replaced the Viet Minh, in the Vietnam War.


== Military ==


=== Vietnamese National Army (1949–55) ===

Following the signing of the 1949 Élysée Accords in Paris, Bảo Đại was able to create a National Army for defense purposes.
It fought under the State of Vietnam's banner and leadership and was commanded by General Nguyễn Văn Hinh.


== Economy ==


=== Currency ===
The currency used within the French Union was the French Indochinese piastre. Notes were issued and managed by the "Issue Institute of the States of Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam" (Institut d’Emission des Etats du Cambodge, du Laos et du Viêt-Nam). In 1953, Vietnam introduced its own currency.


== Foreign relations ==
By 1950, a number of countries recognized the State of Vietnam:


=== Membership in international organizations ===
On 21 October 1949, the United Nations Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East, having considered the applications of both the State of Vietnam and the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, accepted the SVN as an associate member. As of 1952, while applying for United Nations membership, the State of Vietnam was a member of the following organizations: 

Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East
World Health Organization
International Labour Organization
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
International Telecommunication Union
Universal Postal Union
International Office of Epizootics


== Administrative divisions ==


=== Autonomous regions ===
 
Following the creation of the State of Vietnam and the establishment of its government, the Chief of State Bảo Đại signed the two ordinances related to the administration and local governance of the State of Vietnam, namely Ordinance No. 1 ("Organisation and Operation of civil authorities in Vietnam") and Ordinance No. 2 ("Statutes of Government office"). These ordinances divided the State of Vietnam into three large autonomous regions, namely Bắc Việt (former Tonkin), Trung Việt (former Annam), and Nam Việt (former Cochinchina), the local government of each autonomous region was headed by a Thủ hiến (Governour). Since 1948, the three regions had also been referred to as Bắc Phần, Trung Phần, and Nam Phần.
On 4 August 1954 the government of the State of Vietnam enacted Ordinance No. 21 which abolished the autonomous status of the three regions and abolished the post of regional governour, replacing them with central government representatives in all parts of its territory.


=== Domain of the Crown ===

The Domain of the Crown (Vietnamese: Hoàng triều Cương thổ / 皇朝疆土; French: Domaine de la Couronne) was originally the Nguyễn dynasty's geopolitical concept for its protectorates and principalities where the Kinh ethnic group didn't make up the majority, later it became a type of administrative unit of the State of Vietnam. It was officially established on 15 April 1950 and dissolved on 11 March 1955. In the areas of the Domain of the Crown Chief of State Bảo Đại was still officially (and legally) titled as the "Emperor of the Nguyễn dynasty".
The Domain of the Crown contained the following five provinces established from the former Montagnard country of South Indochina:

Đồng Nai Thượng
Lâm Viên
Pleiku
Darlac
Kontum
In Bắc phần it contained the following provinces:

Hòa Bình (Mường Autonomous Territory)
Phong Thổ (Thái Autonomous Territory)
Lai Châu (Thái Autonomous Territory)
Sơn La (Thái Autonomous Territory)
Lào Kay (Mèo Autonomous Territory)
Hà Giang (Mèo Autonomous Territory)
Bắc Kạn (Thổ Autonomous Territory)
Cao Bằng (Thổ Autonomous Territory)
Lạng Sơn (Thổ Autonomous Territory)
Hải Ninh (Nùng Autonomous Territory)
Móng Cái (Nùng Autonomous Territory)


== See also ==
Vietnamese nationalism
First Indochina War
Cold War in Asia
History of Vietnam
Vietnamese National Army


== References ==


== Bibliography ==


== External links ==
 Media related to State of Vietnam at Wikimedia Commons